11.6.2011  |  EN |  Official Journal of the European Union |  L 155/176  
---|---|---|---  
  
* * *

COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 547/2011

of 8 June 2011 

implementing Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards labelling requirements for plant protection products

(Text with EEA relevance)

THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION,

Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union,

Having regard to Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market and repealing Council Directives 79/117/EEC and 91/414/EEC (1), and in particular Article 65(1) thereof,

Whereas:

(1) |  In accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 the labelling requirements set out in Article 16 of Directive 91/414/EEC of the Council of 15 July 1991 concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market (2) and in Annexes IV and V thereto, are to continue to apply under Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009.  
---|---  
  
(2) |  It is therefore necessary for the implementation of Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 to adopt a regulation incorporating those labelling requirements for plant protection products with any necessary modifications, such as updating references.  
---|---  
  
(3) |  Provisions should be included concerning re-use of packaging and concerning plant protection products which are to be used for experiments or tests for research or development purposes.  
---|---  
  
(4) |  The measures provided for in this Regulation are in accordance with the opinion of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health,  
---|---  
  
HAS ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:

Article 1

The labelling of plant protection products shall comply with the requirements, as set out in Annex I, and contain, where approriate, the standard phrases for special risks to human or animal health or to the environment, as set out in Annex II, and the standard phrases for safety precautions for the protection of human or animal health or of the environment, as set out in Annex III.

Article 2

This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.

It shall apply from 14 June 2011.

This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States.

Done at Brussels, 8 June 2011.

For the Commission

The President

José Manuel BARROSO 

* * *

(1) [OJ L 309, 24.11.2009, p. 1](./../../../../legal-content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:2009:309:TOC).

(2) [OJ L 230, 19.8.1991, p. 1](./../../../../legal-content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:1991:230:TOC).

* * *

ANNEX I

LABELLING REQUIREMENTS AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 1

|  (1) |  The following information shall be included clearly and indelibly on the packaging of plant protection products: |  (a) |  the trade name or designation of the plant protection product;  
---|---  
(b) |  the name and address of the holder of the authorisation and the authorisation number of the plant protection product and, if different, the name and address of the person responsible for the final packaging and labelling or for the final labelling of the plant protection product on the market;  
---|---  
(c) |  the name of each active substance expressed as provided for in Article 10 (2.3) of Directive 1999/45/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (1) with clear indication of the chemical form. The name must be as given in the list contained in Annex VI to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council (2) or, if not included therein, its ISO common name. If the latter is not available, the active substance shall be designated by its chemical designation according to IUPAC rules;  
---|---  
(d) |  the concentration of each active substance expressed as follows: |  (i) |  for solids, aerosols, volatile liquids (maximum boiling point 50 °C) or viscous liquids (lower limit 1 Pa s at 20 °C), as % w/w and g/kg,  
---|---  
(ii) |  for other liquids/gel formulations, as % w/w and g/l,  
---|---  
(iii) |  for gases, as% v/v and % w/w.  
---|---  
  
If the active substance is a micro-organism, its content shall be expressed as the number of active units per volume or weight or any other matter that is relevant to the micro-organism, e.g. colony forming units per gram (cfu/g);

(e) |  the net quantity of plant protection product given in: g or kg for solid formulations, g, kg, ml or l for gases and ml or l for liquid formulations;  
---|---  
(f) |  the formulation batch number and production date;  
---|---  
(g) |  information on first aid;  
---|---  
(h) |  the nature of any special risks to human or animal health or to the environment, by means of standard phrases selected by the competent authority, as appropriate, from those set out in Annex II;  
---|---  
(i) |  safety precautions for the protection of human or animal health or of the environment, in the form of standard phrases selected by the competent authority, as appropriate, from those set out in Annex III;  
---|---  
(j) |  the type of action of the plant protection product (e.g. insecticide, growth regulator, herbicide, fungicide, etc.) and the mode of action;  
---|---  
(k) |  the type of preparation (e.g. wettable powder, emulsifiable concentrate, etc.);  
---|---  
(l) |  the uses for which the plant protection product has been authorised and any specific agricultural, plant health and environmental conditions under which the product may be used or shall not be used;  
---|---  
(m) |  directions for and conditions of use and the dose rate including where appropriate the maximum dose per hectare per application and the maximum number of applications per year. The dose rate is expressed in metric units, for each use provided for under the terms of the authorisation;  
---|---  
(n) |  where appropriate, the safety interval for each use between the last application and: |  (i) |  sowing or planting of the crop to be protected,  
---|---  
(ii) |  sowing or planting of succeeding crops,  
---|---  
(iii) |  access by humans or animals,  
---|---  
(iv) |  harvesting,  
---|---  
(v) |  use or consumption;  
---|---  
(o) |  particulars of possible phytotoxicity, varietal susceptibility, and any other direct or indirect adverse side effects on plants or products of plant origin together with the intervals to be observed between application and sowing or planting of: |  — |  the crop in question, or  
---|---  
— |  subsequent and adjacent crops;  
---|---  
(p) |  if accompanied by a leaflet, as set out in point 2, the sentence ‘Read accompanying instructions before use’;  
---|---  
(q) |  directions for appropriate conditions of storage, safe disposal of the plant protection product and of the packaging;  
---|---  
(r) |  where necessary, the expiry date for normal conditions of storage;  
---|---  
(s) |  a prohibition concerning the re-use of packaging, except by the authorisation holder and on condition that packaging has been specifically designed in order to allow re-use by the authorisation holder;  
---|---  
(t) |  any information required by the authorisation in accordance with Articles 31, 36(3), 51(5) or 54 of Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009;  
---|---  
(u) |  the categories of users allowed to use the plant protection product, where use is limited to certain categories.  
---|---  
|  (2) |  The information required by points 1-(m), (n), (o), (q), (r) and (t) may be indicated on a separate leaflet accompanying the package if the space available on the package is too small. Such a leaflet shall be regarded as part of the label.  
---|---|---  
|  (3) |  In no circumstances may the label of the packaging of a plant protection product bear the indications ‘non-toxic’, ‘harmless’, or similar indications. However, information that the plant protection product may be used when bees or other non target species are active, or when crops or weeds are in flower or other such phrases to protect bees, or phrases with similar information concerning the protection of bees or of other non-target species, may be included in the label, if the authorisation explicitly allows use under such conditions.  
---|---|---  
|  (4) |  Member States may make the placing of plant protection products on the market in their territories subject to their being labelled in their national language or languages.  
---|---|---  
|  (5) |  By way of derogation from point (1), labelling and packaging of plant protection products to be used for experiments or tests for research or development purposes, as provided for in Article 54 of Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009, need only comply with points (1)(b), (c), (d), (j), (k) of this Annex. The label shall include information required by the permit for trial purposes, provided for in Article 54(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 and the words ‘product intended for experimental use, not fully characterised, handle with extreme care’.  
---|---|---  
  
* * *

(1) [OJ L 200, 30.7.1999, p. 1](./../../../../legal-content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:1999:200:TOC).

(2) [OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1](./../../../../legal-content/EN/AUTO/?uri=OJ:L:2008:353:TOC).

* * *

ANNEX II

STANDARD PHRASES FOR SPECIAL RISKS TO HUMAN OR ANIMAL HEALTH OR TO THE ENVIRONMENT AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 1

INTRODUCTION

The following additional standard phrases are defined to supplement the phrases provided for by Directive 1999/45/EC, which applies to plant protection products. The provisions of that Directive shall also be used for plant protection products containing micro-organisms, including viruses, as active substances. The labelling of products containing micro-organisms, including viruses, as active substances shall also reflect the provisions concerning dermal and respiratory sensitisation testing which are laid down in part B of the Annex to Commission Regulation (EU) No 544/2011 (1) and part B of the Annex to Commission Regulation (EU) No 545/2011 (2).

The standard phrases for special risks are without prejudice to Annex I.

1\. Standard phrases for special risks

1.1. Special risks related to humans (RSh)

RSh 1

BG |  : |  Токсичен при контакт с очите.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Tóxico en contacto con los ojos.  
CS |  : |  Toxický při styku s očima.  
DA |  : |  Giftig ved kontakt med øjnene.  
DE |  : |  Giftig bei Kontakt mit den Augen.  
ET |  : |  Mürgine silma sattumisel.  
EL |  : |  Τοξικό όταν έρθει σε επαφή με τα μάτια.  
EN |  : |  Toxic by eye contact.  
FR |  : |  Toxique par contact oculaire.  
IT |  : |  Tossico per contatto oculare.  
LV |  : |  Toksisks nonākot saskarē ar acīm.  
LT |  : |  Toksiška patekus į akis.  
HU |  : |  Szemmel érintkezve mérgező.  
MT |  : |  Tossiku meta jmiss ma’ l-għajnejn.  
NL |  : |  Giftig bij oogcontact.  
PL |  : |  Działa toksycznie w kontakcie z oczami.  
PT |  : |  Tóxico por contacto com os olhos.  
RO |  : |  Toxic în contact cu ochii!  
SK |  : |  Jedovatý pri kontakte s očami.  
SL |  : |  Strupeno v stiku z očmi.  
FI |  : |  Myrkyllistä joutuessaan silmään.  
SV |  : |  Giftigt vid kontakt med ögonen.  
  
RSh 2

BG |  : |  Може да причини фотосенсибилизация.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Puede causar fotosensibilización.  
CS |  : |  Může vyvolat fotosenzibilizaci.  
DA |  : |  Kan give overfølsomhed over for sollys/UV-stråling.  
DE |  : |  Sensibilisierung durch Licht möglich.  
ET |  : |  Võib põhjustada valgussensibiliseerimist.  
EL |  : |  Μπορεί να προκαλέσει φωτοευαισθητοποίηση.  
EN |  : |  May cause photosensitisation.  
FR |  : |  Peut entraîner une photosensibilisation.  
IT |  : |  Può causare fotosensibilizzazione.  
LV |  : |  Var izraisīt fotosensibilizāciju.  
LT |  : |  Gali sukelti fotosensibilizaciją.  
HU |  : |  Fényérzékenységet okozhat.  
MT |  : |  Jista’ jikkawża fotosensitiżżazzjoni.  
NL |  : |  Kan fotosensibilisatie veroorzaken.  
PL |  : |  Może powodować nadwrażliwość na światło.  
PT |  : |  Pode causar fotossensibilização.  
RO |  : |  Poate cauza fotosensibilitate!  
SK |  : |  Môže spôsobiť fotosenzibilizáciu.  
SL |  : |  Lahko povzroči preobčutljivost na svetlobo.  
FI |  : |  Voi aiheuttaa herkistymistä valolle.  
SV |  : |  Kan orsaka överkänslighet för solljus/UV-strålning.  
  
RSh 3

BG |  : |  Контактът с парите причинява изгаряния на кожата и очите, контактът с течността причинява измръзвания.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  El contacto con los vapores provoca quemaduras de la piel y de los ojos; el contacto con el producto líquido provoca congelación.  
CS |  : |  Při styku s parami způsobuje poleptání kůže a očí a při styku s kapalinou způsobuje omrzliny.  
DA |  : |  Kontakt med dampe giver ætsninger på hud og øjne, og kontakt med væske giver forfrysninger.  
DE |  : |  Kontakt mit Dämpfen verursacht Verätzungen an Haut und Augen und Kontakt mit der Flüssigkeit verursacht Erfrierungen.  
ET |  : |  Kokkupuude auruga põhjustab põletushaavu nahale ja silmadele ning kokkupuude vedelikuga põhjustab külmumist.  
EL |  : |  Οι ατμοί μπορεί να προκαλέσουν εγκαύματα στο δέρμα και στα μάτια·η επαφή με το υγρό μπορεί να προκαλέσει κρυο-παγήματα.  
EN |  : |  Contact with vapour causes burns to skin and eyes and contact with liquid causes freezing.  
FR |  : |  Le contact avec les vapeurs peut provoquer des brûlures de la peau et des yeux; le contact avec le gaz liquide peut causer des engelures.  
IT |  : |  Il contatto con il vapore può causare ustioni della pelle e bruciori agli occhi; il contatto con il liquido può causare congelamento.  
LV |  : |  Saskare ar tvaikiem izraisa ādas un acu apdegumus un saskare ar šķidrumu izraisa apsaldējumus.  
LT |  : |  Garai sukelia odos ir akių nudegimą, skystis- nušalimą.  
HU |  : |  Az anyag gőzével való érintkezés a bőr és a szem égési sérülését okozhatja, illetve a folyadékkal való érintkezés fagyást okozhat.  
MT |  : |  Kuntatt mal-fwar jikkawża ħruq fil-ġilda u fl-għajnejn filwaqt li kuntatt mal-likwidu jikkawża iffriżar.  
NL |  : |  Contact met de damp veroorzaakt brandwonden aan huid en ogen; contact met de vloeistof veroorzaakt bevriezing.  
PL |  : |  Kontakt z oparami powoduje poparzenia skóry i oczu, kontakt z cieczą powoduje zamarzanie.  
PT |  : |  O contacto com vapores do produto provoca queimadura na pele e nos olhos; o contacto com o produto líquido provoca congelação.  
RO |  : |  Contactul cu vaporii cauzează arsuri ale pielii și ochilor, iar contactul cu lichidul cauzează degerături!  
SK |  : |  Pri kontakte s parou spôsobuje popáleniny pokožky a očí a kontakt s kvapalinou spôsobuje omrzliny.  
SL |  : |  Stik s hlapi povzroča opekline kože in oči, stik s tekočino povzroča ozebline.  
FI |  : |  Kosketus höyryyn voi aiheuttaa palovammoja iholle ja silmiin ja kosketus nesteeseen paleltumavammoja.  
SV |  : |  Kontakt med ångor orsakar frätskador på hud och ögon, kontakt med vätska orsakar förfrysningsskador.  
  
1.2. Special risks related to the environment (RSe)

None.

2\. Attribution criteria for standard phrases for special risks

2.1. Attribution criteria for standard phrases related to humans

RSh 1

Toxic by eye contact.

The phrase shall be assigned where an eye irritation test according to point 7.1.5 of part A of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 545/2011 has resulted in overt signs of systemic toxicity (e.g. related to cholinesterase inhibition) or mortality among the animals tested, which is likely to be attributable to absorption of the active substance through the mucous membranes of the eye. The risk phrase shall also be applied if there is evidence in humans for systemic toxicity after eye contact.

Eye protection shall be specified in these cases, as outlined in the general provisions of Annex III.

RSh 2

May cause photosensitisation.

The phrase shall be assigned where there is clear evidence from experimental systems or documented human exposure that products show photosensitising effects. The phrase shall also be applied to products containing a given active substance or formulation ingredient, which shows photosensitising effects in humans if the product contains this photosensitising component at a concentration of 1 % (w/w) or higher.

Personal protective measures shall be specified in these cases, as outlined in the general provisions of Annex III.

RSh 3

Contact with vapour causes burns to skin and eyes and contact with liquid causes freezing.

The phrase shall be assigned to plant-protection products being formulated as liquefied gas, where appropriate (e.g. preparations of methyl bromide). Personal protective measures shall be specified in these cases, as outlined in the general provisions of Annex III.

This phrase shall not be used in cases where risk phrases R34 or R35, as set out in Directive 1999/45/EC, are applied.

2.2. Attribution criteria for standard phrases related to the environment

None.

* * *

(1) See page 1 of this Official Journal.

(2) See page 67 of this Official Journal.

* * *

ANNEX III

STANDARD PHRASES FOR SAFETY PRECAUTIONS FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN OR ANIMAL HEALTH OR TO THE ENVIRONMENT, AS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 1

INTRODUCTION

The following additional standard phrases are defined to supplement the phrases provided for by Directive 1999/45/EC, which applies to plant-protection products. The provisions of that Directive shall also be used for plant-protection products containing micro-organisms, including viruses, as active substances. The labelling of products containing micro-organisms, including viruses, as active substances shall also reflect the provisions concerning dermal and respiratory sensitisation testing which are laid down in part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 544/2011 and part B of the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 545/2011.

The standard phrases for safety precautions are without prejudice to Annex I.

1\. General provisions

All plant-protection products shall be labelled with the following phrase, which shall be supplemented by the text in parentheses, as appropriate:

SP 1

BG |  : |  Да не се замърсяват водите с този продукт или с неговата опаковка. (Да не се почиства използваната техника в близост до повърхностни води/Да се избягва замърсяване чрез отточни канали на ферми или пътища.).  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  No contaminar el agua con el producto ni con su envase. [No limpiar el equipo de aplicación del producto cerca de aguas superficiales/Evítese la contaminación a través de los sistemas de evacuación de aguas de las explotaciones o de los caminos.]  
CS |  : |  Neznečišťujte vody přípravkem nebo jeho obalem. (Nečistěte aplikační zařízení v blízkosti povrchových vod/Zabraňte kontaminaci vod splachem z farem a z cest).  
DA |  : |  Undgå forurening af vandmiljøet med produktet eller med beholdere, der har indeholdt produktet. [Rens ikke sprøjteudstyr nær overfladevand/Undgå forurening via dræn fra gårdspladser og veje].  
DE |  : |  Mittel und/oder dessen Behälter nicht in Gewässer gelangen lassen. (Ausbringungsgeräte nicht in unmittelbarer Nähe von Oberflächengewässern reinigen/Indirekte Einträge über Hofund Straßenabläufe verhindern.)  
ET |  : |  Vältida vahendi või selle pakendi vette sattumist (Seadmeid pinnavee lähedal mitte puhastada/Vältida saastamist läbi lauda ja teede drenaazhide).  
EL |  : |  Μην μολύνετε το νερό με το προϊόν ή τη συσκευασία του. [Να μην πλένετε τον εξοπλισμό εφαρμογής κοντά σε επιφανειακά ύδατα/Να αποφευχθεί η μόλυνση μέσω των συστημάτων αποχέτευσης από τις λιθόστρωτες επιφάνειες και τους δρόμους.]  
EN |  : |  Do not contaminate water with the product or its container (Do not clean application equipment near surface water/Avoid contamination via drains from farmyards and roads).  
FR |  : |  Ne pas polluer l’eau avec le produit ou son emballage. [Ne pas nettoyer le matériel d’application près des eaux de surface./ Éviter la contamination via les systèmes d’évacuation des eaux à partir des cours de ferme ou des routes.]  
IT |  : |  Non contaminare l’acqua con il prodotto o il suo contenitore. [Non pulire il materiale d’applicazione in prossimità delle acque di superficie./Evitare la contaminazione attraverso i sistemi di scolo delle acque dalle aziende agricole e dalle strade.]  
LV |  : |  Nepiesārņot ūdeni ar augu aizsardzības līdzekli un tā iepakojumu/ netīrīt smidzināšanas tehniku ūdenstilpju un ūdensteču tuvumā/izsargāties no piesārņošanas caur drenāžu no pagalmiem un ceļiem.  
LT |  : |  Neužteršti vandens augalų apsaugos produktu ar jo pakuote (Neplauti purškimo įrenginių šalia paviršinio vandens telkinių/ vengti taršos per drenažą iš sodybų ar nuo kelių).  
HU |  : |  A termékkel vagy annak tartályával ne szennyezze a vizeket. (A berendezést vagy annak részeit ne tisztítsa felszíni vizek közelében/kerülje a gazdaságban vagy az utakon lévő vízelvezetőkön keresztül való szennyeződést).  
MT |  : |  Tikkontaminax ilma bil-prodott jew il-kontenitur tiegħu (Tnaddafx apparat li jintuża għall-applikazzjoni qrib ilma tax-xita/Ara li ma jkunx hemm kontaminazzjoni minn btieħi u toroq).  
NL |  : |  Zorg ervoor dat u met het product of zijn verpakking geen water verontreinigt. [Reinig de apparatuur niet in de buurt van oppervlaktewater/Zorg ervoor dat het water niet via de afvoer van erven of wegen kan worden verontreinigd.]  
PL |  : |  Nie zanieczyszczać wód produktem lub jego opakowaniem (Nie myć aparatury w pobliżu wód powierzchniowych/Unikać zanieczyszczania wód poprzez rowy odwadniające z gospodarstw i dróg).  
PT |  : |  Não poluir a água com este produto ou com a sua embalagem. [Não limpar o equipamento de aplicação perto de águas de superfície./Evitar contaminações pelos sistemas de evacuação de águas das explorações agrícolas e estradas.]  
RO |  : |  A nu se contamina apa cu produsul sau cu ambalajul său (a nu se curăța echipamentele de aplicare în apropierea apelor de suprafață/a se evita contaminarea prin sistemele de evacuare a apelor din ferme sau drumuri)!  
SK |  : |  Neznečisťujte vodu prípravkom alebo jeho obalom (Nečistite aplikačné zariadenie v blízkosti povrchových vôd/Zabráňte kontaminácii prostredníctvom odtokových kanálov z poľnohospodárskych dvorov a vozoviek).  
SL |  : |  S sredstvom ali njegovo embalažo ne onesnaževati vode. (Naprav za nanašanje ne čistiti ali izplakovati v bližini površinskih voda./Preprečiti onesnaženje preko drenažnih in odtočnih jarkov na kmetijskih zemljiščih in cestah.)  
FI |  : |  Älä saastuta vettä tuotteella tai sen pakkauksella. (Älä puhdista levityslaitteita pintaveden lähettyvillä./Vältä saastumista piha- ja maantieojien kautta.)  
SV |  : |  Förorena inte vatten med produkten eller dess behållare. (Rengör inte sprututrustning i närheten av vattendrag/Undvik förorening via avrinning från gårdsplaner och vägar.)  
  
2\. Specific safety precautions

2.1. Safety precautions for operators (SPo)

General provisions

|  1. |  Member States may identify suitable personal protective equipment for operators and prescribe specific elements of this equipment (e.g. coveralls, apron, gloves, sturdy shoes, rubber boots, face protection, face shield, tightly fitting glasses, hat, hood or respirator of a specified type). Such supplementary safety precautions shall be without prejudice to the standard phrases applicable according to Directive 1999/45/EC.  
---|---|---  
|  2. |  Member States may further identify the specific tasks which require particular protective equipment, such as mixing, loading or handling the undiluted product, applying or spraying the diluted product, handling recently treated materials like plants or soil or entering recently treated areas.  
---|---|---  
|  3. |  Member States may add specifications of engineering controls, such as: |  — |  a closed transfer system must be used when transferring the pesticide from the product container to the spray tank,  
---|---  
— |  the operator must work within a closed cabin (with an air conditioning/air filtration system) during spraying,  
---|---  
— |  engineering controls may replace personal protective equipment if they provide an equal or higher standard of protection.  
---|---  
  
Specific provisions

SPo 1

BG |  : |  При контакт с кожата, първо да се отстрани продукта със суха кърпа и след това кожата да се измие обилно с вода.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  En caso de contacto con la piel, elimínese primero el producto con un paño seco y después lávese la piel con agua abundante.  
CS |  : |  Po zasažení kůže přípravek nejdříve odstraňte pomocí suché látky a poté kůži opláchněte velkým množstvím vody.  
DA |  : |  Efter kontakt med huden, fjern først produktet med en tør klud og vask derefter med rigeligt vand.  
DE |  : |  Nach Kontakt mit der Haut zuerst das Mittel mit einem trockenen Tuch entfernen und dann die Haut mit reichlich Wasser abspülen.  
ET |  : |  Nahaga kokkupuutel kõigepealt eemaldada vahend kuiva lapiga ning seejärel pesta nahka rohke veega.  
EL |  : |  Ύστερα από επαφή με το δέρμα, αφαιρέστε πρώτα το προϊό ν με ένα στεγνό πανί και στη συνέχεια ξεπλύνετε το δέρμα με άφθονο νερό.  
EN |  : |  After contact with skin, first remove product with a dry cloth and then wash the skin with plenty of water.  
FR |  : |  Après contact avec la peau, éliminer d’abord le produit avec un chiffon sec, puis laver la peau abondamment à l’eau.  
IT |  : |  Dopo il contatto con la pelle, rimuovere il prodotto con un panno asciutto e quindi lavare abbondantemente con acqua.  
LV |  : |  Pēc saskares ar ādu, vispirms notīrīt augu aizsardzības līdzekli no ādas ar sausu drānu un pēc tam mazgāt ādu ar lielu ūdens daudzumu.  
LT |  : |  Patekus ant odos, pirmiausia nuvalyti sausu audiniu, po to gerai nuplauti vandeniu.  
HU |  : |  Bőrrel való érintkezés esetén először száraz ruhával távolítsa el a terméket, majd a szennyeződött bőrt bő vízzel mossa le.  
MT |  : |  Wara kuntatt mal-ġilda, l-ewwel neħħi l-prodott b’xoqqa niexfa u mbgħad aħsel il-ġilda b’ħafna ilma.  
NL |  : |  Na contact met de huid moet u eerst het gewasbeschermingsmiddel met een droge doek verwijderen en daarna de huid met veel water wassen.  
PL |  : |  Po kontakcie ze skórą najpierw usunąć produkt suchą szmatką, a następnie przemyć skórę dużą ilością wody.  
PT |  : |  Em caso de contacto com a pele, remover primeiro o produto com um pano seco e, em seguida, lavar a pele com muita água.  
RO |  : |  Dacă produsul vine în contact cu pielea, îndepărtați produsul cu un material uscat și apoi spălați cu multă apă!  
SK |  : |  Po kontakte s pokožkou najskôr odstráňte prípravok suchou tkaninou a potom opláchnite veľkým množstvom vody.  
SL |  : |  Ob stiku s kožo odstraniti sredstvo s suho krpo in sprati kožo z obilo vode.  
FI |  : |  Ihokosketuksen jälkeen tuote pyyhitään aluksi pois kuivalla kankaalla ja sitten iho pestään runsaalla vedellä.  
SV |  : |  Efter kontakt med huden, avlägsna först produkten med en torr trasa och tvätta sedan med mycket vatten.  
  
SPo 2

BG |  : |  Цялото защитно облекло да се изпере след употреба.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Lávese toda la ropa de protección después de usarla.  
CS |  : |  Veškerý ochranný oděv po použití vyperte.  
DA |  : |  Vask alle personlige værnemidler efter brug.  
DE |  : |  Die gesamte Schutzkleidung muss nach Gebrauch gewaschen werden.  
ET |  : |  Peale kasutamist kogu kaitseriietus pesta.  
EL |  : |  Ξεπλύνετε όλες τις προστατευτικές ενδυμασίες μετά τη χρήση.  
EN |  : |  Wash all protective clothing after use.  
FR |  : |  Laver tous les équipements de protection après utilisation.  
IT |  : |  Lavare tutto l’equipaggiamento di protezione dopo l’impiego.  
LV |  : |  Pēc lietošanas izmazgāt visu aizsargtērpu.  
LT |  : |  Po darbo išskalbti visus apsauginius drabužius.  
HU |  : |  Használat után minden védőruházatot ki kell mosni.  
MT |  : |  Aħsel l-ilbies protettiv wara li-tuża.  
NL |  : |  Was alle beschermende kleding na gebruik.  
PL |  : |  Uprać odzież ochronną po użyciu.  
PT |  : |  Depois da utilização do produto, lavar todo o vestuário de protecção.  
RO |  : |  A se spăla toate echipamentele de protecție după utilizare!  
SK |  : |  Ochranný odev po aplikácii očistite.  
SL |  : |  Po uporabi oprati vso zaščitno obleko.  
FI |  : |  Kaikki suojavaatteet pestävä käytön jälkeen.  
SV |  : |  Tvätta alla skyddskläder efter användning.  
  
SPo 3

BG |  : |  След запалване на продукта да не се вдишва дима и третираната зона да се напусне незабавно.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Tras el inicio de la combustión del producto, abandónese inmediatamente la zona tratada sin inhalar el humo.  
CS |  : |  Po vznícení přípravku nevdechujte kouř a ihned opusťte ošetřovaný prostor.  
DA |  : |  Efter antænding af produktet, undgå at indånde røgen og forlad det behandlede område øjeblikkeligt.  
DE |  : |  Nach Anzünden des Mittels Rauch nicht einatmen und die behandelte Fläche sofort verlassen.  
ET |  : |  Peale vahendi süttimist suitsu mitte sisse hingata ning käideldud alalt otsekohe lahkuda.  
EL |  : |  Μετά την ανάφλεξη του προϊόντος μην εισπνεύσετε τον καπνό και απομακρυνθείτε αμέσως από την περιοχή χρήσης.  
EN |  : |  After igniting the product, do not inhale smoke and leave the treated area immediately.  
FR |  : |  Après déclenchement de la fumigation, ne pas inhaler la fumée et quitter la zone traitée immédiatement.  
IT |  : |  Una volta iniziata la combustione, non inalare il fumo e abbandonare immediatamente la zona trattata.  
LV |  : |  Pēc augu aizsardzības līdzekļa aizdedzināšanas, neieelpot dūmus un nekavējoties atstāt apstrādāto platību.  
LT |  : |  Užsidegus neįkvėpti dūmų ir nedelsiant palikti apdorotą plotą.  
HU |  : |  A termék meggyújtása után óvakodjon a keletkező füst belélegzésétől, és azonnal hagyja el a kezelt területet.  
MT |  : |  Wara li tqabbad il-prodott, tiblax id-duħħan u warrab minnufih mill-post li jkun ġie ittrattat.  
NL |  : |  Nadat u het product hebt aangestoken, mag u de rook niet inademen en moet u de behandelde ruimte onmiddellijk verlaten.  
PL |  : |  Po zapaleniu produktu nie wdychać dymu i niezwłocznie opuścić obszar poddany zabiegowi.  
PT |  : |  Depois de iniciada a fumigação do produto, não inalar os fumos e sair imediatamente da zona em tratamento.  
RO |  : |  După fumigarea produsului, nu inhalați fumul și părăsiți imediat zona tratată!  
SK |  : |  Po zapálení prípravku, nevdychujte dym a okamžite opustite ošetrovaný priestor.  
SL |  : |  Po zažigu sredstva ne vdihavati dima in takoj zapustiti tretirano območje.  
FI |  : |  Tuotteen syttyessä vältettävä savun hengittämistä ja poistuttava käsitellyltä alueelta viipymättä.  
SV |  : |  När produkten antänts, andas inte in röken och lämna det behandlade området genast.  
  
SPo 4

BG |  : |  Опаковката да се отвори на открито и при сухо време.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  El recipiente debe abrirse al aire libre y en tiempo seco.  
CS |  : |  Obal s přípravkem musí být otevřen ve venkovním prostředí a za sucha.  
DA |  : |  Beholderen skal åbnes udendørs og under tørre forhold.  
DE |  : |  Der Behälter muss im Freien und Trockenen geöffnet werden.  
ET |  : |  Pakend tuleb avada õues ning kuivades tingimustes.  
EL |  : |  Το δοχείο πρέπει να ανοιχθεί στο ύπαιθρο και σε συνθήκες ξηρασίας.  
EN |  : |  The container must be opened outdoors and in dry conditions.  
FR |  : |  L’emballage doit être ouvert à l’extérieur par temps sec.  
IT |  : |  L’imballaggio deve essere aperto all’esterno e in condizioni di tempo secco.  
LV |  : |  Iepakojumu atvērt ārpus telpām un sausos apstākļos.  
LT |  : |  Pakuotę atidaryti lauke, esant sausoms oro sąlygoms.  
HU |  : |  A tartályt csak a szabad levegőn, száraz időben lehet kinyitni.  
MT |  : |  Il-kontenitur għandu jinfetaħ f’ambjent miftuħ u xott.  
NL |  : |  De verpakking moet buiten, in droge omstandigheden, worden geopend.  
PL |  : |  Opakowanie otwierać na zewnątrz i w suchych warunkach.  
PT |  : |  Abrir a embalagem ao ar livre e com tempo seco.  
RO |  : |  Ambalajul trebuie deschis în aer liber și pe vreme uscată!  
SK |  : |  Nádobu otvárajte vonku a za suchého počasia.  
SL |  : |  Embalažo odpreti na prostem in v suhih razmerah.  
FI |  : |  Pakkaus avattava ulkona kuivissa olosuhteissa.  
SV |  : |  Behållaren måste öppnas utomhus och under torra förhållanden.  
  
SPo 5

BG |  : |  Да се проветрят основно/да се посочи време/третираните площи/оранжериите до изсъхване на разтвора, преди отново да се влезе в тях.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Ventilar las zonas/los invernaderos tratados [bien/durante un tiempo especificado/hasta que se haya secado la pulverización] antes de volver a entrar.  
CS |  : |  Před opětovným vstupem ošetřené prostory/skleníky [důkladně /uveďte dobu/ do zaschnutí postřikového nánosu] vyvětrejte.  
DA |  : |  De behandlede områder/drivhuse ventileres [grundigt/eller angivelse af tid/indtil sprøjtemidlet er tørret], før man igen går ind i dem.  
DE |  : |  Vor dem Wiederbetreten ist die behandelte Fläche/das Gewächshaus (gründlich/oder Zeit angeben/bis zur Abtrocknung des Spritzbelages) zu lüften.  
ET |  : |  Õhutada käideldud alad/põhjalikult kasvuhooned/määratletud aja jooksul/enne uuesti sisenemist kuni pihustatud vahendi kuivamiseni.  
EL |  : |  Να αερίσετε τους χώρους/τα θερμοκήπια όπου χρησιμοποιήθηκαν φυτοφάρμακα [πλήρως/ή να προσδιοριστεί η χρονική περίοδος/μέχρι να στεγνώσει το προϊόν] πριν ξαναμπείτε.  
EN |  : |  Ventilate treated areas/greenhouses thoroughly/time to be specified/until spray has dried before re-entry.  
FR |  : |  Ventiler [à fond/ou durée à préciser/jusqu’au séchage de la pulvérisation] les zones/serres traitées avant d’y accéder.  
IT |  : |  Ventilare [a fondo/per una durata da specificare/fino all’essiccazione dello spray] le zone serre trattate prima di accedervi.  
LV |  : |  Pirms atgriešanās rūpīgi vēdināt apstrādātās platības/siltumnīcas (norāda laiku) kamēr izsmidzinātais šķidrums nožuvis.  
LT |  : |  Gerai išvėdinti apdorotus plotus/šiltnamius (vėdinimo laikas turi būti nurodytas). Įeiti į apdorotus plotus leidžiama tik visiškai jiems išdžiūvus.  
HU |  : |  A kezelt területet/üvegházakat [alaposan/az előírt időn át/a permet felszáradásáig] szellőztesse az oda való visszatérés előtt.  
MT |  : |  Ħalli l-arja tgħaddi minn dawk il-postijiet/serer li ġew ittrattati sew/speċifika t-tul ta’ ħin/sakemm jinxef il-bexx qabel ma terġa’ tidħol.  
NL |  : |  Voordat u opnieuw behandelde ruimten/kassen binnengaat, moet u die [grondig ventileren/gedurende (geef de periode aan) ventileren/ventileren tot de spuitvloeistof is opgedroogd].  
PL |  : |  Dokładnie wietrzyć obszar poddany zabiegowi/szklarnie/przez określony czas/Przed ponownym wejściem poczekać do wyschnięcia cieczy.  
PT |  : |  Arejar [bem] os locais/estufas tratados [durante (neste caso, precisar o período)/até à secagem do pulverizado] antes de neles voltar a entrar.  
RO |  : |  A se ventila zonele/serele tratate, în întregime/(să se specifice timpul necesar)/până la uscarea produsului pulverizat, înainte de a reintra!  
SK |  : |  Pred ďalším vstupom dôkladne vyvetrajte ošetrovaný priestor/ skleník tak, aby rozprášený roztok prípravku zaschol/ uveďte potrebný čas/.  
SL |  : |  Pred ponovnim vstopom temeljito zračiti tretirane površine/rastlinjake/ določi se čas/dokler se nanešeno sredstvo ne posuši.  
FI |  : |  Käsitellyt alueet/kasvihuoneet/käsiteltyjä alueita/kasvihuoneita tuuletettava (perusteellisesti/tai täsmennetään tuuletusaika/- kunnes tuote on kuivunut) ennen sinne palaamista.  
SV |  : |  Vädra (omsorgsfullt/eller ange tidsperiod/tills produkten torkat) före vistelse i behandlade utrymmen/växthus.  
  
2.2. Safety precautions related to the environment (SPe)

SPe 1

BG |  : |  С цел опазване на подпочвените води/почвообитаващите организми, да не се прилага този или друг продукт, съдържащ (да се посочи активното вещество или групата активни вещества според случая) повече от (да се посочи срока или честотата).  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Para proteger [las aguas subterráneas/los organismos del suelo], no aplicar este producto ni ningún otro que contenga (precísese la sustancia o la familia de sustancias, según corresponda) más de (indíquese el tiempo o la frecuencia).  
CS |  : |  Za účelem ochrany podzemních vod/půdních organismo neaplikujte tento ani žádný jiný přípravek obsahující (uveďte účinnou látku nebo popřípadě skupinu účinných látek) déle/více než (uveďte určitou lhůtu nebo četnost aplikací).  
DA |  : |  For at beskytte [grundvandet/jordorganismer] må dette produkt eller andre produkter, der indeholder (angiv navnet på aktivstoffet eller gruppe af aktivstoffer), kun anvendes/ikke anvendes mere end (angiv tidsperiode eller antal behandlinger).  
DE |  : |  Zum Schutz von (Grundwasser/Bodenorganismen) das Mittel ‘…’ oder andere … haltige Mittel (Identifizierung des Wirkstoffes oder einer Wirkstoffgruppe) nicht mehr als … (Angabe der Anwendungshäufigkeit in einem bestimmten Zeitraum) anwenden.  
ET |  : |  Põhjavee/mullaorganismide kaitsmiseks mitte kasutada seda või ükskõik millist muud vahendit, mis sisaldab (määratleda vastavalt toimeaine või aine klass) rohkem kui (periood või määratletav sagedus).  
EL |  : |  Για να προστατέψετε [τα υπόγεια νερά/τους οργανισμούς στο έδαφος] μην χρησιμοποιείτε αυτό ή οποιοδήποτε άλλο προϊόν που περιέχει (προσδιορίστε τη δραστική ουσία ή την κατηγορία των ουσιών αναλόγως) περισσότερο από (να προσδιοριστεί η χρονική περίοδος ή η συχνότητα).  
EN |  : |  To protect groundwater/soil organisms do not apply this or any other product containing (identify active substance or class of substances, as appropriate) more than (time period or frequency to be specified).  
FR |  : |  Pour protéger [les eaux souterraines/les organismes du sol], ne pas appliquer ce produit ou tout autre produit contenant (préciser la substance ou la famille de substances selon le cas) plus de (fréquence à préciser).  
IT |  : |  Per proteggere [le acque sotterranee/gli organismi del suolo] non applicare questo o altri prodotti contenenti (specificare la sostanza attiva o la classe di sostanze, secondo il caso) più di (indicare la durata o la frequenza).  
LV |  : |  Lai aizsargātu gruntsūdeni/augsnes organismus, nelietot augu aizsardzības līdzekli ‘…’ vai citu augu aizsardzības līdzekli, kurš satur ‘…’ (norāda darbīgo vielu vai darbīgo vielu grupu) vairāk nekā … (norāda apstrāžu skaitu noteiktā laika periodā).  
LT |  : |  Siekiant apsaugoti požeminį vandenį/dirvos organizmus nenaudoti šio ar bet kurio kito produkto, kurio sudėtyje yra (nurodyti veikliąją medžiagą ar medžiagų grupę, kaip tinka) dažniau kaip (laikas ar dažnumas turi būti nurodytas).  
HU |  : |  A talajvíz/a talaj élő szervezeteinek védelme érdekében ezt vagy (a megfelelő hatóanyag vagy anyagcsoport)-ot tartalmazó bármilyen más készítményt ne használja (az előírt időtartam/- gyakoriság)-nál hosszabb ideig/többször.  
MT |  : |  Sabiex tipproteġi l-ilma tal-pjan/organiżmi fil-ħamrija tapplikax dan il-prodott jew xi prodott ieħor li jkun fih (identifica s-sustanza jew klassi ta’ sustanzi attivi kif imiss) iżjed minn (speċifika ż-żmien jew il-frekwenza).  
NL |  : |  Om [het grondwater/de bodemorganismen] te beschermen mag u dit product of andere producten die (geef naar gelang van het geval de naam van de werkzame stof of van de categorie werkzame stoffen) bevatten, niet langer dan gedurende (geef de tijdsduur aan) gebruiken/ten hoogste (geef de frequentie) gebruiken.  
PL |  : |  W celu ochrony wód gruntowych/organizmów glebowych nie stosować tego lub żadnego innego produktu zawierającego (określić substancję aktywną lub klasę substancji, kiedy dotyczy) nie dłużej niż (określony czas)/nie częściej niż (określona częstotliwość).  
PT |  : |  Para protecção [das águas subterrâneas/dos organismos do solo], não aplicar este produto ou qualquer outro que contenha (indicar, consoante o caso, a substância activa ou a família de substâncias activas) durante mais de (período a precisar) ou mais do que (frequência a precisar).  
RO |  : |  Pentru protecția apei freatice/organismelor din sol, nu aplicați acest produs sau alt produs care conține (identificați substanța activă sau clasa corespunzătoare, după caz) mai mult de (să se specifice perioada de timp sau frecvența tratamentelor)!  
SK |  : |  Z dôvodu ochrany podzemnej vody nepoužívajte tento alebo iný prípravok obsahujúci (uveďte účinnú látku alebo skupinu účinných látok) dlhšie ako (upresnite obdobie alebo frekvenciu).  
SL |  : |  Zaradi zaščite podtalnice/talnih organizmov ne uporabljati tega ali drugih sredstev, ki vsebujejo (navede se aktivno snov ali skupino aktivnih snovi) več kot (navede se časovno obdobje ali število tretiranj).  
FI |  : |  (Pohjaveden/maaperän eliöiden) suojelemiseksi vältettävä tämän tai minkä tahansa muun tuotteen, joka sisältää (tapauksen mukaan tehoaine tai aineluokka), käyttöä useammin (ajanjakso tai käyttötiheys).  
SV |  : |  För att skydda (grundvatten/marklevande organismer), använd inte denna produkt eller andra produkter innehållande (ange verksamt ämne eller grupp av ämnen) mer än (ange tidsperiod eller antal behandlingar).  
  
SPe 2

BG |  : |  Да не са прилага при (да се посочи типа почва или ситуацията) почви, с цел опазване на подпочвените води/водните организми.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Para proteger [las aguas subterráneas/los organismos acuáticos], no aplicar en suelos (precísese la situación o el tipo de suelos).  
CS |  : |  Za účelem ochrany podzemních vod/vodních organismo neaplikujte přípravek na půdách (uveďte druh půdy nebo situaci).  
DA |  : |  For at beskytte [grundvandet/organismer, der lever i vand] må dette produkt ikke anvendes (på beskrevet jordtype eller under beskrevne forhold).  
DE |  : |  Zum Schutz von (Grundwasser/Gewässerorganismen) nicht auf (genaue Angabe der Bodenart oder Situation) Böden ausbringen.  
ET |  : |  Põhjavee/veeorganismide kaitsmiseks mitte kasutada (määratleda pinnasetüüp või olukord).  
EL |  : |  Για να προστατέψετε [τα υπόγεια νερά/τους υδρόβιους οργα- νισμούς] μην χρησιμοποιείτε το προϊόν αυτό σε εδάφη (προσ- διορίστε τον τύπο του εδάφους ή τις ιδιαίτερες συνθήκες).  
EN |  : |  To protect groundwater/aquatic organisms do not apply to (soil type or situation to be specified) soils.  
FR |  : |  Pour protéger [les eaux souterraines/les organismes aquatiques], ne pas appliquer ce produit sur (type de sol ou situation à préciser).  
IT |  : |  Per proteggere [le acque sotterranee/gli organismi acquatici] non applicare sul suolo (indicare il tipo di suolo o la situazione).  
LV |  : |  Lai aizsargātu gruntsūdeņus/ūdens organismus, nelietot (norāda augsnes tipu vai apstākļus) augsnēs.  
LT |  : |  Siekiant apsaugoti požeminį vandenį/vandens organizmus nenaudoti (nurodyti dirvožemio tipą ar situaciją) dirvožemiuose.  
HU |  : |  A talajvíz/a vízi szervezetek védelme érdekében (az előírt talajtípus vagy helyzet) talajokra ne használja.  
MT |  : |  Biex tipproteġi l-ilma tal-pjan/organiżmi ta’ l-ilma tapplikax f’ħamrija (speċifika t-tip ta’ ħamrija jew is-sitwazzjoni).  
NL |  : |  Om [het grondwater/in het water levende organismen] te beschermen mag dit product niet worden gebruikt op (benoem het soort bodem of geef een beschrijving ervan) bodems.  
PL |  : |  W celu ochrony wód gruntowych/organizmów wodnych nie stosować na glebach (określić typ gleby lub warunki glebowe).  
PT |  : |  Para protecção [das águas subterrâneas/dos organismos aquáticos], não aplicar este produto em solos (precisar a situação ou o tipo de solo).  
RO |  : |  Pentru protecția apei freatice/organismelor acvatice, nu aplicați pe sol (să se specifice tipul de sol sau situația în cauză)!  
SK |  : |  Z dôvodu ochrany podzemnej vody/vodných organizmov neaplikujte na (upresnite typ pôdy alebo situáciu) pôdu.  
SL |  : |  Zaradi zaščite podtalnice/vodnih organizmov ne uporabljati na (navede se tip tal ali druge posebne razmere) tleh.  
FI |  : |  (Pohjaveden/vesieliöiden) suojelemiseksi ei saa käyttää (täsmennetään maaperätyyppi tai tilanne) maaperään.  
SV |  : |  För att skydda (grundvatten/vattenlevande organismer), använd inte denna produkt på (ange jordtyp eller markförhållande).  
  
SPe 3

BG |  : |  Да се осигури нетретирана буферна зона от (да се посочи разстоянието) до неземеделски земи/повърхностни води, с цел опазване на водните организми/растенията, които не са обект на третиране/членестоногите, които не са обект на третиране/насекомите.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Para proteger [los organismos acuáticos/las plantas no objetivo/ los artrópodos no objetivo/los insectos], respétese sin tratar una banda de seguridad de (indíquese la distancia) hasta [la zona no cultivada/las masas de agua superficial].  
CS |  : |  Za účelem ochrany vodních organismů/necílových rostlin/necílových členovců/hmyzu dodržujte neošetřené ochranné pásmo (uveďte vzdálenost) vzhledem k nezemědělské půdě/- povrchové vodě.  
DA |  : |  Må ikke anvendes nærmere end (angiv afstand) fra [vandmiljøet, vandløb, søer m.v./ikke dyrket område] for at beskytte [organismer, der lever i vand/landlevende ikkemålorganismer, vilde planter, insekter og leddyr].  
DE |  : |  Zum Schutz von (Gewässerorganismen/Nichtzielpflanzen/- Nichtzielarthropoden/Insekten) eine unbehandelte Pufferzone von (genaue Angabe des Abstandes) zu (Nichtkulturland/Oberflächengewässer) einhalten.  
ET |  : |  Veeorganismide/mittetaimsete sihtliikide/mittesihtlülijalgsete/- putukate kaitsmiseks pidada kinni mittepritsitavast puhvervööndist (määratleda kaugus) põllumajanduses mittekasutatavast maast/pinnaseveekogudest.  
EL |  : |  Για να προστατέψετε [τους υδρόβιους οργανισμούς/μη στοχευόμενα φυτά/μη στοχευόμενα αρθρόποδα/έντομα] να αφήσετε μιαν αψέκαστη ζώνη προστασίας (προσδιορίστε την απόσταση) μέχρι [μη γεωργική γη/σώματα επιφανειακών υδάτων].  
EN |  : |  To protect aquatic organisms/non-target plants/non-target arthropods/insects respect an unsprayed buffer zone of (distance to be specified) to non-agricultural land/surface water bodies.  
FR |  : |  Pour protéger [les organismes aquatiques/les plantes non cibles/les arthropodes non cibles/les insectes], respecter une zone non traitée de (distance à préciser) par rapport à [la zone non cultivée adjacente/aux points d’eau].  
IT |  : |  Per proteggere [gli organismi acquatici/gli insetti/le piante non bersaglio/gli artropodi non bersaglio] rispettare una fascia di sicurezza non trattata di (precisare la distanza) da [zona non coltivata/corpi idrici superficiali].  
LV |  : |  Lai aizsargātu ūdens organismus/ar lietojumu nesaistītos augus/ar lietojumu nesaistītos posmkājus/kukaiņus, ievērot aizsargjoslu (norāda attālumu) līdz lauksaimniecībā neizmantojamai zemei/ūdenstilpēm un ūdenstecēm.  
LT |  : |  Siekiant apsaugoti vandens organizmus/netikslinius augalus/- netikslinius nariuotakojus/vabzdžius būtina išlaikyti apsaugos zoną (nurodyti atstumą) iki ne žemės ūkio paskirties žemės/paviršinio vandens telkinių.  
HU |  : |  A vízi szervezetek/nem célzott növények/nem célzott ízeltlábúak/ rovarok védelme érdekében a nem mezőgazdasági földterülettől/ felszíni vizektől (az előírt távolság) távolságban tartson meg egy nem permetezett biztonsági övezetet.  
MT |  : |  Sabiex tipproteġi organiżmi ta’ l-ilma/pjanti mhux immirati/ artropodi/insetti mhux immirati, irrispetta żona confini ħielsa mill-bexx ta’ (speċifika d-distanza) minn art mhix agrikola/ għadajjar ta’ l-ilma fil-wiċċ.  
NL |  : |  Om [in het water levende organismen/niet tot de doelsoorten behorende planten en dieren/niet tot de doelsoorten behorende geleedpotigen/ de insecten] te beschermen mag u in een bufferzone van (geef de afstand aan) rond [niet-landbouwgrond/oppervlaktewater] niet spuiten.  
PL |  : |  W celu ochrony organizmów wodnych/roślin nie będących obiektem zwalczania/stawonogów/owadów nie będących obiektem zwalczania konieczne jest określenie strefy buforowej w odległości (określona odległość) od terenów nieużytkowanych rolniczo/zbiorników i cieków wodnych.  
PT |  : |  Para protecção [dos organismos aquáticos/das plantas nãovisadas/ dos insectos/artrópodes não-visados], respeitar uma zona não-pulverizada de (distância a precisar) em relação [às zonas não-cultivadas/às águas de superfície].  
RO |  : |  Pentru protecția organismelor acvatice/plantelor ne-țintă/artropodelor/ insectelor ne-țintă respectați o zonă tampon netratată de (să se specifice distanța) până la terenul necultivat/ apa de suprafață!  
SK |  : |  Z dôvodu ochrany vodných organizmov/necielených rastlín/- necielených článkonožcov/hmyzu udržiavajte medzi ošetrovanou plochou a neobhospodarovanou zónou/- povrchovými vodnými plochami ochranný pás zeme v dĺžke (upresnite dĺžku).  
SL |  : |  Zaradi zaščite vodnih organizmov/neciljnih rastlin/neciljnih členonožcev/žuželk upoštevati netretiran varnostni pás (navede se razdaljo) do nekmetijske površine/vodne površine.  
FI |  : |  (Vesieliöiden/muiden kuin torjuttavien kasvien/muiden kuin torjuttavien niveljalkaisten/hyönteisten) suojelemiseksi (muun kuin maatalousmaan/pintavesialueiden) väliin on jätettävä (täsmennetään etäisyys) ruiskuttamaton suojavyöhyke.  
SV |  : |  För att skydda (vattenlevande organismer/andra växter än de man avser att bekämpa/andra leddjur än de man avser att bekämpa/insekter), lämna en sprutfri zon på (ange avstånd) till (icke-jordbruksmark/vattendrag).  
  
SPe 4

BG |  : |  Да не се прилага върху непропускливи повърхности като асфалт, бетон, паваж, железопътни линии и други такива с висок риск за оттичане, с цел опазване на водните орга- низми/растенията, които не са обект на третиране.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Para proteger [los organismos acuáticos/las plantas no objetivo], no aplicar sobre superficies impermeables como el asfalto, el cemento, los adoquines, [las vías del ferrocarril] ni en otras situaciones con elevado riesgo de escorrentía.  
CS |  : |  Za účelem ochrany vodních organismů/necílových rostlin neaplikujte přípravek na nepropustný povrch, jako je asfalt, beton, dlážděný povrch, železniční trať nebo v jiných případech, kdy hrozí vysoké riziko odplavení.  
DA |  : |  Må ikke anvendes på befæstede arealer såsom asfalterede, beton-, sten- eller grusbelagte områder og veje [jernbanespor] eller på andre områder, hvorfra der er en stor risiko for runoff til omgivelserne. [For at beskytte organismer, der lever i vand/planter, man ikke ønsker at bekæmpe].  
DE |  : |  Zum Schutz von (Gewässerorganismen/Nichtzielpflanzen) nicht auf versiegelten Oberflächen wie Asphalt, Beton, Kopfsteinpflaster (Gleisanlagen) bzw. in anderen Fällen, die ein hohes Abschwemmungsrisiko bergen, ausbringen.  
ET |  : |  Veeorganismide/mittesihtliikide kaitsmiseks mitte kasutada läbilaskmatutel pindadel nagu näiteks asfalt, betoon, munakivi, raudteerööpad ning muudes oludes, kus on kõrge lekkimisoht.  
EL |  : |  Για να προστατέψετε [υδρόβιους οργανισμούς/μη στοχευόμενα φυτά] να μην χρησιμοποιείται σε αδιαπέραστες επιφάνειες όπως άσφαλτο, σκυρόδεμα, λιθόστρωτα [σιδηροτροχιές] και άλλες επιφάνειες με υψηλό κίνδυνο απορροής.  
EN |  : |  To protect aquatic organisms/non-target plants do not apply on impermeable surfaces such as asphalt, concrete, cobblestones, railway tracks and other situations with a high risk of run-off.  
FR |  : |  Pour protéger [les organismes aquatiques/les plantes non cibles], ne pas appliquer sur des surfaces imperméables telles que le bitume, le béton, les pavés, [les voies ferrées] et dans toute autre situation où le risque de ruissellement est important.  
IT |  : |  Per proteggere [gli organismi acquatici/le piante non bersaglio] non applicare su superfici impermeabili quali bitume, cemento, acciottolato, [binari ferroviari] e negli altri casi ad alto rischio di deflusso superficiale.  
LV |  : |  Lai aizsargātu ūdens organismus/ar lietojumu nesaistītos augus, nelietot augu aizsardzības līdzekli uz necaurlaidīgas virsmas, piemēram, asfalta, betona, bruģa, sliežu ceļiem, un citās vietās ar augstu noteces risku.  
LT |  : |  Siekiant apsaugoti vandens organizmus/netikslinius augalus nenaudoti ant nepralaidžių paviršių tokių kaip asfaltas, betonas, grindinio akmenys, geležinkelio bėgių ar kitose situacijose, kuriuose didelė nuotėkio tikimybė.  
HU |  : |  A vízi szervezetek/nem célzott növények védelme érdekében a vizet nem áteresztő felületeken (pl. aszfalt, beton, utcakövezet, vasúti pályák és az elfolyás egyéb veszélye esetén) ne alkalmazza.  
MT |  : |  Biex tipproteġi organiżmi ta’ l-ilma/pjanti mhux immirati tapplikax fuq uċuh impermeabbli bħal l-asfalt, konkrit, ċangaturi, linji tal-ferrovija u sitwazzjonijiet oħra b’riskju kbir ta’ skul.  
NL |  : |  Om [in het water levende organismen/niet tot de doelsoorten behorende planten en dieren] te beschermen mag u dit product niet gebruiken op ondoordringbare oppervlakken, zoals asfalt, beton [,/en] kasseien [en spoorlijnen,] of op andere plaatsen waar het product gemakkelijk kan wegstromen.  
PL |  : |  W celu ochrony organizmów wodnych/roślin nie będących obiektem zwalczania nie stosować na nieprzepuszczalnych powierzchniach, takich jak: asfalt, beton, bruk, torowiska i innych przypadkach, gdy istnieje wysokie ryzyko spływania cieczy.  
PT |  : |  Para protecção [dos organismos aquáticos/das plantas nãovisadas], não aplicar este produto em superfícies impermeáveis, como asfalto, betão, empedrados [ou linhas de caminho de ferro], nem em qualquer outra situação em que o risco de escorrimentos seja elevado.  
RO |  : |  Pentru protecția organismelor acvatice/plantelor ne-țintă nu aplicați pe suprafețe impermeabile precum asfalt, ciment, pavaj, cale ferată sau în alte situații în care există risc maré de scurgere!  
SK |  : |  Z dôvodu ochrany vodných organizmov/necielených rastlín neaplikujte na nepriepustné povrchy, ako je asfalt, betón, dlažobné kocky, koľajnice a iné povrchy, pri ktorých je zvýšené riziko stekania vody.  
SL |  : |  Zaradi zaščite vodnih organizmov/neciljnih rastlin ne uporabljati na neprepustnih površinah kot so asfalt, beton, tlak, železniški tiri in drugih površinah, kjer je velika nevarnost odtekanja.  
FI |  : |  (Vesieliöiden/muiden kuin torjuttavien kasvien) suojelemiseksi ei saa käyttää läpäisemättömillä pinnoilla, kuten asvaltilla, betonilla, katukivillä, (rautatiekiskoilla) ja muissa tilanteissa, joissa on suuri huuhtoutumisen vaara.  
SV |  : |  För att skydda (vattenlevande organismer/andra växter än de man avser att bekämpa), använd inte denna produkt på hårdgjorda ytor såsom asfalt, betong, kullersten, (järnvägsspår) och andra ytor med hög risk för avrinning.  
  
SPe 5

BG |  : |  Продуктът трябва да е напълно инкорпориран в почвата, с цел опазване на птиците/дивите бозайници. Уверете се, че продуктът е напълно инкорпориран и в края на редовете.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Para proteger [las aves/los mamíferos silvestres], el producto debe incorporarse completamente al suelo; asegurarse de que se incorpora al suelo totalmente al final de los surcos.  
CS |  : |  Za účelem ochrany ptáků/volně žijících savců musí být přípravek zcela zapraven do půdy; zajistěte, aby był přípravek zcela zapraven do půdy také na konci výsevních nebo výsadbových řádků.  
DA |  : |  For at beskytte [fugle/vilde pattedyr] skal produktet omhyggeligt graves ned i jorden. Sørg for, at produktet også er helt tildækket for enden af rækkerne.  
DE |  : |  Zum Schutz von (Vögeln/wild lebenden Säugetieren) muss das Mittel vollständig in den Boden eingearbeitet werden; es ist sicherzustellen, dass das Mittel auch am Ende der Pflanzbzw. Saatreihen vollständig in den Boden eingearbeitet wird.  
ET |  : |  Lindude/metsloomade kaitsmiseks peab vahend täielikult mullaga ühinema; tagada vahendi täielik ühinemine ka ridade lõpus.  
EL |  : |  Για να προστατέψετε [πουλιά/άγρια θηλαστικά] το προϊόν πρέπει να καλυφθεί πλήρως από το έδαφος. Βεβαιωθείτε πως το προϊόν έχει καλυφθεί πλήρως στις άκρες των αυλακιών.  
EN |  : |  To protect birds/wild mammals the product must be entirely incorporated in the soil; ensure that the product is also fully incorporated at the end of rows.  
FR |  : |  Pour protéger [les oiseaux/mammifères sauvages], le produit doit être entièrement incorporé dans le sol; s’assurer que le produit est également incorporé en bout de sillons.  
IT |  : |  Per proteggere [gli uccelli/i mammiferi selvatici] il prodotto deve essere interamente incorporato nel terreno; assicurarsi che il prodotto sia completamente incorporato in fondo al solco.  
LV |  : |  Lai aizsargātu putnus/savvaļas zīdītājus, augu aizsardzības līdzekli pilnībā iestrādāt augsnē; nodrošināt līdzekļa pilnīgu iestrādi augsnē arī kultūraugu rindu galos.  
LT |  : |  Siekiant apsaugoti paukščius/laukinius gyvūnus būtina produktą visiškai įterpti į dirvą, užtikrinti, kad produktas būtų visiškai įterptas vagų gale.  
HU |  : |  A madarak/vadon élő emlősök védelme érdekében a terméket teljes egészében be kell dolgozni a talajba; ügyeljen arra, hogy az anyag a sorok végén is teljes egészében be legyen dolgozva.  
MT |  : |  Sabiex tipproteġi għasafar/mammiferi selvaġġi l-prodott għandu jkun inkorporat għal kollox fil-ħamrija; żgura li lprodott ikun ukoll inkorporat għal kollox f’tarf ir-raddi.  
NL |  : |  Om [de vogels/de wilde zoogdieren] te beschermen moet het product volledig in de bodem worden ondergewerkt; zorg ervoor dat het product ook aan het einde van de rij is ondergewerkt.  
PL |  : |  W celu ochrony ptaków/dzikich ssaków produkt musi być całkowicie przykryty glebą; zapewnić że produkt jest również całkowicie przykryty na końcach rzędów.  
PT |  : |  Para protecção [das aves/dos mamíferos selvagens], incorporar totalmente o produto no solo, incluindo no final dos sulcos.  
RO |  : |  Pentru protecția păsărilor/mamiferelor sălbatice, produsul trebuie încorporat în totalitate în sol! A se asigura că produsul este încorporat în totalitate la sfârșitul rândurilor!  
SK |  : |  Z dôvodu ochrany vtákov/divo žijúcich cicavcov sa musí všetok prípravok zakryť pôdou. Presvedčte sa, či je prípravok dobre zakrytý pôdou aj na konci brázdy.  
SL |  : |  Zaradi zaščite ptic/divjih vrst sesalcev je treba sredstvo popolnoma vdelati v tla; zagotoviti, da je sredstvo v celowi vdelano v tla tudi na koncih vrst.  
FI |  : |  (Lintujen/luonnonvaraisten nisäkkäiden) suojelemiseksi tuote on sekoitettava maaperään; varmistettava, että tuote sekoittuu maaperään täysin myös vakojen päässä.  
SV |  : |  För att skydda (fåglar/vilda däggdjur) måste produkten nedmyllas helt och hållet i jorden; se till att produkten även nedmyllas helt i slutet av raderna.  
  
SPe 6

BG |  : |  Да се отстранят разлетите/разпилените количества, с цел опазване на птиците/дивите бозайници.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Para proteger [las aves/los mamíferos silvestres], recójase todo derrame accidental.  
CS |  : |  Za účelem ochrany ptáků/volně žijících savců odstraňte rozsypaný nebo rozlitý přípravek.  
DA |  : |  For at beskytte [fugle/vilde pattedyr] skal alt spildt produkt fjernes.  
DE |  : |  Zum Schutz von (Vögeln/wild lebenden Säugetieren) muss das verschüttete Mittel beseitigt werden.  
ET |  : |  Lindude/metsloomade kaitsmiseks kõrvaldada mahavalgunud vahend.  
EL |  : |  Για να προστατέψετε [πουλιά/άγρια ζώα] μαζέψτε όσο προϊόν έχει χυθεί κατά λάθος.  
EN |  : |  To protect birds/wild mammals remove spillages.  
FR |  : |  Pour protéger [les oiseaux/les mammifères sauvages], récupérer tout produit accidentellement répandu.  
IT |  : |  Per proteggere [gli uccelli/i mammiferi selvatici] recuperare il prodotto fuoriuscito accidentalmente.  
LV |  : |  Lai aizsargātu putnus/savvaļas zīdītājus, novērst izšļakstīšanos.  
LT |  : |  Siekiant apsaugoti paukščius/laukinius gyvūnus pašalinti pabiras ar išsiliejusį produktą.  
HU |  : |  A madarak/vadon élő emlősök védelme érdekében távolítsa el a véletlenül kiömlött anyagot.  
MT |  : |  Neħħi kull tixrid biex tipproteġi l-għasafar/mammiferi selvaġġi.  
NL |  : |  Om [de vogels/de wilde zoogdieren] te beschermen moet u gemorst product verwijderen.  
PL |  : |  W celu ochrony ptaków/dzikich ssaków usuwać rozlany/rozsypany produkt.  
PT |  : |  Para protecção [das aves/dos mamíferos selvagens], recolher todo o produto derramado.  
RO |  : |  Pentru protecția păsărilor/mamiferelor sălbatice îndepărtați urmele de produs!  
SK |  : |  Z dôvodu ochrany vtákov/divo žijúcich cicavcov odstráňte náhodne rozsypaný prípravok.  
SL |  : |  Zaradi zaščite ptic/divjih vrst sesalcev odstraniti razsuto sredstvo.  
FI |  : |  Lintujen/luonnonvaraisten nisäkkäiden) suojelemiseksi ympäristöön vahingossa levinnyt tuote poistettava.  
SV |  : |  För att skydda (fåglar/vilda däggdjur), avlägsna spill.  
  
SPe 7

BG |  : |  Да не се прилага по време на размножителния период на птиците.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  No aplicar durante el período de reproducción de las aves.  
CS |  : |  Neaplikujte v době hnízdění ptáků.  
DA |  : |  Må ikke anvendes i fuglenes yngletid.  
DE |  : |  Nicht während der Vogelbrutzeit anwenden.  
ET |  : |  Mitte kasutada lindude pesitsusperioodil.  
EL |  : |  Να μην χρησιμοποιείται κατά την περίοδο αναπαραγωγής των πουλιών.  
EN |  : |  Do not apply during the bird breeding period.  
FR |  : |  Ne pas appliquer durant la période de reproduction des oiseaux.  
IT |  : |  Non applicare durante il periodo di riproduzione degli uccelli.  
LV |  : |  Nelietot putnu vairošanās periodā.  
LT |  : |  Nenaudoti paukščių veisimosi laikotarpiu.  
HU |  : |  A madarak költési időszaka alatt nem alkalmazható.  
MT |  : |  Tapplikax matul it-tberrik ta’ l-għasafar.  
NL |  : |  Niet gebruiken tijdens het vogelbroedseizoen.  
PL |  : |  Nie stosować w okresie rozrodczym ptaków.  
PT |  : |  Não aplicar este produto durante o período de reprodução das aves.  
RO |  : |  A nu se aplica produsul în perioada de împerechere a păsărilor!  
SK |  : |  Neaplikujte v čase rozmnožovania vtákov.  
SL |  : |  Ne tretirati v času valjenja ptic.  
FI |  : |  Ei saa käyttää lintujen lisääntymisaikaan.  
SV |  : |  Använd inte denna produkt under fåglarnas häckningsperiod.  
  
SPe 8

BG |  : |  Опасен за пчелите/Да не се прилага при култури по време на цъфтеж, с цел опазване на пчелите и други насекоми- опрашители/Да не се използва на места, където има активна паша на пчели/Преместете или покрийте пчелните кошери по време на третирането и за (да се посочи срок) след третиране/Да не се прилага при наличие на цъфтяща плевелна растителност/Плевелите да се унищожат преди цъфтежа им/Да не се прилага преди (да се посочи срок).  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Peligroso para las abejas./Para proteger las abejas y otros insectos polinizadores, no aplicar durante la floración de los cultivos./No utilizar donde haya abejas en pecoreo activo./Retírense o cúbranse las colmenas durante el tratamiento y durante (indíquese el tiempo) después del mismo./No aplicar cuando las malas hierbas estén en floración./Elimínense las malas hierbas antes de su floración./No aplicar antes de (indíquese el tiempo).  
CS |  : |  Nebezpečný pro včely./Za účelem ochrany včel a jiných hmyzích opylovačů neaplikujte na kvetoucí plodiny./Neaplikujte na místech, na nichž jsou včely aktivní při vyhledávání potravy./Úly musí být během aplikace a po aplikaci (uveďte dobu) přemístěny nebo zakryty./Neaplikujte, jestliže se na pozemku vyskytují kvetoucí plevele./Plevele odstraňte před jejich kvetením./Neaplikujte před (uveďte dobu).  
DA |  : |  Farligt for bier./For at beskytte bier og andre bestøvende insekter må dette produkt ikke anvendes i blomstrende afgrøder./Må ikke anvendes i biernes flyvetid./Tildæk eller flyt bikuber i behandlingsperioden og i (nævn antal timer/dage) efter behandlingen./Må ikke anvendes i nærheden af blomstrende ukrudt./Fjern ukrudt inden blomstring./ Må ikke anvendes inden (tidspunkt).  
DE |  : |  Bienengefährlich./Zum Schutz von Bienen und anderen bestäubenden Insekten nicht auf blühende Kulturen aufbringen./ Nicht an Stellen anwenden, an denen Bienen aktiv auf Futtersuche sind./Bienenstöcke müssen während der Anwendung und für (Angabe der Zeit) nach der Behandlung entfernt oder abgedeckt werden./Nicht in Anwesenheit von blühenden Unkräutern anwenden./Unkräuter müssen vor dem Blühen entfernt werden./Nicht vor (Angabe der Zeit) anwenden.  
ET |  : |  Mesilastele ohtlik/Mesilaste ning muude tolmlevate putukate kaitsmiseks mitte kasutada põllumajanduskultuuride õitsemise ajal/Mitte kasutada aktiivsel korjealal/Kasutamise ajaks ning (määratleda aeg) peale töötlemist tarud eemaldada või katta kinn/Õitseva umbrohu olemasolu korral mitre kasutada/Umbrohi enne õitsemist eemaldada/Mitte kasutada enne (määratleda aeg).  
EL |  : |  Επικίνδυνο για τις μέλισσες. Για να προστατέψετε τις μέλισσες και άλλα έντομα επικονίασης μην χρησιμοποιείτε το προϊόν σε καλλιέργειες κατά την ανθοφορία./Μην χρησιμοποιείτε το προϊόν κατά την περίοδο που οι μέλισσες συλλέγουν γύρη./Απομακρύνετε ή καλύψτε τις κυψέλες κατά τη χρήση του προϊόντος και επί (αναφέρατε το χρόνο) μετά τη χρήση./Μην χρησιμοποιείτε το προϊόν κατά την περίοδο ανθοφορίας ζιζανίων./Απομακρύνετε τα ζιζάνια πριν από την ανθοφορία./Μην το χρησιμοποιείτε πριν (αναφέρατε το χρόνο).  
EN |  : |  Dangerous to bees./To protect bees and other pollinating insects do not apply to crop plants when in flower./Do not use where bees are actively foraging./Remove or cover beehives during application and for (state time) after treatment./ Do not apply when flowering weeds are present./ Remove weeds before flowering./Do not apply before (state time).  
FR |  : |  Dangereux pour les abeilles./Pour protéger les abeilles et autres insectes pollinisateurs, ne pas appliquer durant la floraison./ Ne pas utiliser en présence d’abeilles./Retirer ou couvrir les ruches pendant l’application et (indiquer la période) après traitement./Ne pas appliquer lorsque des adventices en fleur sont présentes./Enlever les adventices avant leur floraison./Ne pas appliquer avant (indiquer la date).  
IT |  : |  Pericoloso per le api./Per proteggere le api e altri insetti impollinatori non applicare alle colture al momento della fioritura./ Non utilizzare quando le api sono in attività./Rimuovere o coprire gli alveari durante l’applicazione e per (indicare il periodo) dopo il trattamento./Non applicare in presenza di piante infestanti in fiore./Eliminare le piante infestanti prima della fioritura./Non applicare prima di (indicare il periodo).  
LV |  : |  Bīstams bitēm. Lai aizsargātu bites un citus apputeksnētājus, nelietot kultūraugu ziedēšanas laikā. Nelietot vietās, kur bites aktīvi meklē barību. Bišu stropus pārvietot vai pārsegt augu aizsardzības līdzekļa smidzināšanas laikā un … (norāda uz cik ilgu laiku) pēc smidzināšanas darba beigām. Nelietot platībās, kurās ir ziedošas nezāles. Apkarot nezāles pirms ziedēšanas. Nelietot pirms … (norāda laiku).  
LT |  : |  Pavojingas bitėms/Siekiant apsaugoti bites ir kitus apdulkinančius vabzdžius nenaudoti augalų žydėjimo metu/Nenaudoti bičių aktyvaus maitinimosi metu/Pašalinti ar uždengti bičių avilius purškimo metu ar (nurodyti laiką) po purškimo./Nenaudoti kai yra žydinčių piktžolių/Sunaikinti piktžoles iki jų žydėjimo/Nenaudoti iki (nurodyti laiką).  
HU |  : |  Méhekre veszélyes/A méhek és egyéb beporzást végző bovaro védelme érdekében virágzási időszakban nem alkalmazható/ Méhek aktív táplálékszerzési időszaka idején nem alkalmazható/ Az alkalmazás idejére és a kezelés után (megadott időszak) ideig távolítsa el vagy fedje be a méhkaptárakat/- Virágzó gyomnövények jelenléte esetén nem alkalmazható/- Virágzás előtt távolítsa el a gyomnövényeket/(megadott időpont) előtt nem alkalmazható.  
MT |  : |  Perikoluż għan-naħal/Sabiex tħares in-naħal u insetti oħra tad-dakra tapplikax fuq uċuħ tar-raba’ meta jkunu bilfjur/ Tużax fejn in-naħal ikun qed jirgħa sew/Neħħi jew agħtti l-ġarar tan-naħal waqt l-applikazzjoni u għal (speċifika l-ħin) wara t-trattament/Tapplikax meta jkun hemm ħaxix ħażin bil-fjur/Neħħi l-ħaxix ħażin qabel ma jwarrad/ Tapplikax qabel (speċifika l-ħin).  
NL |  : |  Gevaarlijk voor bijen./Om de bijen en andere bestuivende insecten te beschermen mag u dit product niet gebruiken op in bloei staande gewassen./Gebruik dit product niet op plaatsen waar bijen actief naar voedsel zoeken./Verwijder of bedek bijenkorven tijdens het gebruik van het product en gedurende (geef de tijdsduur aan) na de behandeling./Gebruik dit product niet in de buurt van in bloei staand onkruid./Verwijder onkruid voordat het bloeit./Gebruik dit product niet vóór (geef de datum of de periode aan).  
PL |  : |  [Niebezpieczne dla pszczół/W celu ochrony pszczół i innych owadów zapylających nie stosować na rośliny uprawne w czasie kwitnienia/Nie używać w miejscach gdzie pszczoły mają pożytek/Usuwać lub przykrywać ule podczas zabiegu i przez (określić czas) po zabiegu/Nie stosować kiedy występują kwitnące chwasty/Usuwać chwasty przed kwitnieniem/Nie stosować przed (określić czas).  
PT |  : |  Perigoso para as abelhas./Para protecção das abelhas e de outros insectos polinizadores, não aplicar este produto durante a floração das culturas./Não utilizar este produto durante o período de presença das abelhas nos campos./- Remover ou cobrir as colmeias durante a aplicação do produto e durante (indicar o período) após o tratamento./Não aplicar este produto na presença de infestantes em floração./ Remover as infestantes antes da floração./Não aplicar antes de (critério temporal a precisar).  
RO |  : |  Periculos pentru albine!/Pentru a proteja albinele și alte insecte polenizatoare nu aplicați pe plante în timpul înfloritului!/ Nu utilizați produsul în timpul sezonului activ al albinelor!/ Îndepărtați sau acoperiți stupii în timpul aplicării și (să se specifice perioada de timp) după tratament!/Nu aplicați produsul în perioada de înflorire a buruienilor!/Distrugeți buruienile înainte de înflorire!/Nu aplicați înainte de (să se specifice perioada de timp)!  
SK |  : |  Nebezpečný pre včely/Z dôvodu ochrany včiel a iného opeľujúceho hmyzu neaplikujte na plodiny v čase kvetu/Nepoužívajte, keď sa v okolí nachádzajú včely/Počas aplikácie a (uveďte čas) po aplikácii úle prikryte alebo presuňte na iné miesto/Neaplikujte, keď sa v okolí nachádzajú kvitnúce buriny/ Odstráňte buriny pred kvitnutím/Neaplikujte pred (uveďte čas).  
SL |  : |  Nevarno za čebele./Zaradi zaščite čebel in drugih žuželk opraševalcev ne tretirati rastlin med cvetenjem./Ne tretirati v času paše čebel./Med tretiranjem in (navede se časovno obdobje) po tretiranju odstraniti ali pokriti čebelje panje./Ne tretirati v prisotnosti cvetočega plevela./Odstraniti plevel pred cvetenjem./Ne tretirati pred (navede se časovno obdobje).  
FI |  : |  Vaarallista mehiläisille./Mehiläisten ja muiden pölyttävien hyönteisten suojelemiseksi ei saa käyttää viljelykasvien kukinta-aikaan./Ei saa käyttää aikana, jolloin mehiläiset lentävät aktiivisesti./Mehiläispesät poistettava tai suojattava levittämisen ajaksi ja (aika) ajaksi käsittelyn jälkeen./Ei saa käyttää, jos alueella on kukkivia rikkakasveja./Poista rikkakasvit ennen kukinnan alkua./Ei saa käyttää ennen (aika).  
SV |  : |  Farligt för bin./För att skydda bin och andra pollinerande insekter, använd inte denna produkt på blommande gröda./Får inte användas där bin aktivt söker efter föda./Avlägsna eller täck över bikupor under behandling och under (ange tidsperiod) efter behandling./Använd inte denna produkt då det finns blommande ogräs./Avlägsna ogräs före blomning./ Använd inte denna produkt före (ange tidsperiod).  
  
2.3. Safety precautions related to good agricultural practice

SPa 1

BG |  : |  Да не се прилага този или друг продукт, съдържащ (да се посочи активното вещество или групата активни вещества според случая) повече от (да се посочи броя на приложенията или срока), за да се избегне развитието на резистентност.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Para evitar la aparición de resistencias, no aplicar este producto ni ningún otro que contenga (indíquese la sustancia activa o la clase de sustancias, según corresponda) más de (indíquese el número de aplicaciones o el plazo).  
CS |  : |  K zabránění vzniku rezistence neaplikujte tento ani žádný jiný přípravek, který obsahuje (uveďte účinnou látku nebo popřípadě skupinu účinných látek) více/déle než (uveďte četnost aplikací nebo lhůtu).  
DA |  : |  For at undgå udviklingen af resistens må dette produkt eller andre produkter, der indeholder (angiv aktivstof eller gruppe af aktivstoffer), kun anvendes/ikke anvendes mere end (i tidsperioden eller antal gange).  
DE |  : |  Zur Vermeidung einer Resistenzbildung darf dieses oder irgendein anderes Mittel, welches (entsprechende Benennung des Wirkstoffes oder der Wirkstoffgruppe) enthält, nicht mehr als (Angabe der Häufigkeit oder der Zeitspanne) ausgebracht werden.  
ET |  : |  Resistentsuse tekkimise vältimiseks seda või ükskõik millist muud vahendit mitte kasutada rohkem kui (kasutamiskordade arv või määratletav periood), mis sisaldab (määratleda vastavalt toimeaine või ainete liik).  
EL |  : |  Προκειμένου να μην αναπτυχθεί ανθεκτικότητα μην χρησιμοποιείτε αυτό ή οποιοδήποτε άλλο προϊόν που περιέχει (προσδιορίστε τη δραστική ουσία ή την κατηγορία των ουσιών αναλόγως) περισσότερο από (να προσδιοριστεί η συχνότητα) φορές.  
EN |  : |  To avoid the build-up of resistance do not apply this or any other product containing (identify active substance or class of substances, as appropriate) more than (number of applications or time period to be specified).  
FR |  : |  Pour éviter le développement de résistances, ne pas appliquer ce produit ou tout autre contenant (préciser la substance ou la famille de substances selon le cas) plus de (nombre d’applications ou durée à préciser).  
IT |  : |  Per evitare l’insorgenza di resistenza non applicare questo o altri prodotti contenenti (indicare la sostanza attiva o la classe di sostanze, a seconda del caso) più di (numero di applicazioni o durata da precisare).  
LV |  : |  Lai izvairītos no rezistences veidošanās, nelietot šo vai jebkuru citu augu aizsardzības līdzekli, kurš satur … (norāda darbīgās vielas vai darbīgo vielu grupas nosaukumu) vairāk nekā … (norāda apstrāžu skaitu vai laiku).  
LT |  : |  Siekiant išvengti atsparumo išsivystymo, nenaudoti šio produkto ar kito produkto, kurio sudėtyje yra (nurodyti veikliają medžiagą ar medžiagų grupę) dažniau kaip (nurodyti apdorojimų skaičių arba laikotarpį).  
HU |  : |  Rezisztancia kialakulásának elkerülése érdekében ezt vagy (a megfelelő hatóanyag vagy anyagcsoport)-ot tartalmazó bármilyen más készítményt ne használja (az előírt kezelésszám vagy időszakok)-nál többször/hosszabb ideig.  
MT |  : |  Sabiex tevita li tinbena reżistenza tapplikax dan jew xi prodott ieħor li jkun fih (identifika s-sustanza jew klassi ta’ sustanzi attivi kif imiss) aktar minn (l-għadd ta’ applikazzjonijiet jew il-ħin li għandu jkun speċifikat)  
NL |  : |  Om resistentieopbouw te voorkomen mag u dit product of andere producten die (geef naar gelang van het geval de naam van de werkzame stof of van de categorie werkzame stoffen) bevatten, niet vaker gebruiken dan (geef het aantal toepassingen aan)/niet langer gebruiken dan (geef de tijdsduur aan).  
PL |  : |  W celu uniknięcia powstawania odporności nie stosować tego lub żadnego innego produktu zawierającego (określić substancję aktywną lub klasę substancji, kiedy dotyczy) nie dłużej niż (określony czas)/nie częściej niż (określona częstotliwość).  
PT |  : |  Para evitar o desenvolvimento de resistências, não aplicar este produto ou qualquer outro que contenha (indicar, consoante o caso, a substância activa ou a família de substâncias activas) mais de (número ou período de aplicações a precisar).  
RO |  : |  Pentru a evita apariția rezistenței nu aplicați acest produs sal orice alt produs conținând (să se specifice substanța activă sal clasa de substanțe, după caz) mai mult de (să se specifice numărul de tratamente sau perioada de timp)!  
SK |  : |  Na zabránenie vzniku rezistencie neaplikujte tento alebo iný prípravok obsahujúci (uveďte účinnú látku alebo skupinu látok) dlhšie ako (upresnite počet aplikácií alebo časový úsek).  
SL |  : |  Zaradi preprečevanja nastanka odpornosti ne uporabljati tega ali drugih sredstev, ki vsebujejo (navede se aktivno snov ali skupino aktivnih snovi) več kot (navede se časovno obdobje ali število tretiranj).  
FI |  : |  Resistenssin kehittymisen estämiseksi ei saa käyttää tätä tai mitä tahansa muuta tuotetta, joka sisältää (tapauksen mukaan tehoaine tai aineluokka), käyttöä useammin (käyttötiheys).  
SV |  : |  För att undvika utveckling av resistens använd inte denna produkt eller andra produkter innehållande (ange verksamt ämne eller grupp av ämnen) mer än (ange antal behandlingar eller tidsperiod).  
  
2.4. Specific safety precautions for rodenticides (SPr)

SPr 1

BG |  : |  Примамките да се поставят така, че да бъде сведен до минимум риска от консумация от други животни. Блоковите примамки да се поставят така, че да не могат да бъдат разнесени от гризачи.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Los cebos deben colocarse de forma que se evite el riesgo de ingestión por otros animales. Asegurar los cebos de manera que los roedores no puedan llevárselos.  
CS |  : |  Nástrahy musí být kladeny tak, aby se minimalizovalo riziko požití jinými zvířaty. Zabezpečte nástrahy, aby nemohly být hlodavci rozvlékány.  
DA |  : |  Produktet skal anbringes på en sådan måde, at risikoen for, at andre dyr kan indtage produktet, formindskes mest muligt. F.eks. ved at produktet anbringes inde i en kasse med små indgangshuller til gnaverne eller inde i gnavernes eget gangsystem. Pas på, at produkt i blokform ikke kan flyttes væk af de gnavere, der skal bekæmpes.  
DE |  : |  Die Köder verdeckt und unzugänglich für andere Tiere ausbringen. Köder sichern, so dass ein Verschleppen durch Nagetiere nicht möglich ist.  
ET |  : |  Peibutussööt tuleb ohutult ladustada selliselt, et minimeerida teiste loomade poolt tarbimise ohtu. Peibutussöödabriketid kindlustada selliselt, et närilised neid ära vedada ei saaks.  
EL |  : |  Τα δολώματα θα πρέπει να τοποθετηθούν με τρόπο τέτοιο που να ελαχιστοποιηθεί η πιθανότητα να καταναλωθούν από άλλα ζώα. Ασφαλίστε τα δολώματα έτσι ώστε να μην μπορούν να τα παρασύρουν τα τρωκτικά.  
EN |  : |  The baits must be securely deposited in a way so as to minimise the risk of consumption by other animals. Secure bait blocks so that they cannot be dragged away by rodents.  
FR |  : |  Les appâts doivent être disposés de manière à minimiser le risque d’ingestion par d’autres animaux. Sécuriser les appâts afin qu’ils ne puissent pas être emmenés par les rongeurs.  
IT |  : |  Le esche devono essere disposte in modo da minimizzare il rischio di ingerimento da parte di altri animali. Fissare le esche in modo che non possano essere trascinate via dai roditori.  
LV |  : |  Ēsmu ejā ievietot tā, lai, tā nebūtu pieejama citiem dzīvniekiem. Ēsmu nostiprināt, lai grauzēji to nevarētu aizvilkt.  
LT |  : |  Jaukas turi būti saugiai išdėstytas taip, kad sumažėtų rizika kitiems gyvūnams jį vartoti. Jauko blokai turi būti taip saugomi, kad graužikai negalėtų jų ištampyti.  
HU |  : |  A csalétket úgy kell biztonságosan kihelyezni, hogy a lehető legkisebb legyen annak a veszélye, hogy abból más állatok is fogyasztanak. A csalétket úgy kell rögzíteni, hogy azt a rágcsálók ne hurcolhassák el.  
MT |  : |  Il-lixki għandhom jitqegħdu hekk li jitnaqqas ir-riskju li jkunu mittiekla minn annimali oħrajn. Orbot il-blokki tallixka sew fejn ikunu biex ma’ jiġux mkaxkra minn fuq ilpost minn rodenti.  
NL |  : |  De lokmiddelen moeten zo worden geplaatst dat het risico dat andere dieren ervan eten zoveel mogelijk wordt beperkt. Maak de blokjes stevig vast, zodat ze niet door de knaagdieren kunnen worden weggesleept.  
PL |  : |  Przynęty muszą być rozłożone w taki sposób, aby zminimalizować ryzyko zjedzenia przez inne zwierzęta. Zabezpieczyć przynętę w ten sposób, aby nie mogła zostać wywleczona przez gryzonie.  
PT |  : |  Colocar os iscos de modo a minimizar o risco de ingestão por outros animais. Fixar os iscos, para que não possam ser arrastados pelos roedores.  
RO |  : |  Momeala trebuie depozitată în condiții de securitate astfel încât să se micșoreze riscul de a fi consumată de către alte animale! A se asigura momeala astfel încât să nu poată fi mutată de către rozătoare!  
SK |  : |  Návnady sa musia umiestniť tak, aby sa k nim nedostali iné zvieratá. Zabezpečte návnady tak, aby ich hlodavce nemohli odtiahnuť.  
SL |  : |  Vabe je treba nastaviti varno, tako da je tveganje zaužitja za druge živali minimalno. Zavarovati vabe tako, da jih glodalci ne morejo raznesti.  
FI |  : |  Syötit on sijoitettava siten, että ne eivät eiheuta riskiä muille eläimille. Syötit on kiinnitettävä siten, että jyrsijät eivät saa vietyä niitä mukanaan.  
SV |  : |  Betena måste placeras så att andra djur inte kan förtära dem. Förankra betena så att de inte kan släpas iväg av gnagare.  
  
SPr 2

BG |  : |  Третираните площи трябва да бъдат обозначени в периода на третиране. Да се посочи опасността от отравяне (първично или вторично) с антикоагуланта и да се укаже неговата противоотрова.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  La zona tratada debe señalizarse durante el tratamiento. Debe advertirse del riesgo de intoxicación (primaria o secundaria) por el anticoagulante así como del antídoto correspondiente.  
CS |  : |  Plocha určená k ošetření musí být během ošetřování označena. Je třeba upozornit na nebezpečí otravy (primární nebo sekundární) antikoagulantem a uvést protijed.  
DA |  : |  Det behandlede område skal afmærkes i behandlingsperioden. Faren for forgiftning (primær eller sekundær) ved indtagelse af antikoaguleringsmidler, samt modgiften herfor, skal nævnes på opslag.  
DE |  : |  Die zu behandelnde Fläche muss während der Behandlungszeit markiert sein. Die Gefahr der (primären oder sekundären) Vergiftung durch das Antikoagulans und dessen Gegenmittel sollte erwähnt werden.  
ET |  : |  Käideldud ala tuleb käitlemisperioodiks märgistada. Antikoagulandi mürgituse (esmane või teisene) oht ning selle vastane antidoot peab olema ära mainitud.  
EL |  : |  Η περιοχή στην οποία έχει χρησιμοποιηθεί το προϊόν πρέπει να έχει σημαδευτεί κατά την περίοδο χρήσης. Θα πρέπει να αναφέρεται ο κίνδυνος (πρωτογενούς ή δευτερογενούς) δηλη- τηρίασης από το αντιπηκτικό καθώς και το αντίδοτο σε περίπτωση δηλητηρίασης.  
EN |  : |  Treatment area must be marked during the treatment period. The danger from being poisoned (primary or secondary) by the anticoagulant and the antidote against it should be mentioned.  
FR |  : |  La zone de traitement doit faire l’objet d’un marquage pendant la période de traitement. Le risque d’empoisonnement (primaire ou secondaire) par l’anticoagulant, ainsi que son antidote doivent être mentionnés.  
IT |  : |  Durante il trattamento la zona interessata deve essere chiaramente segnalata. Il pericolo di avvelenamento (primario o secondario) dovuto all’anticoagulante deve essere evidenziato assieme al relativo antidoto.  
LV |  : |  Apstrādes laikā apstrādājamo platību marķēt. Norādīt saindēšanās (primārās vai sekundārās) apdraudējumu ar antikoagulantu un tā antidotu.  
LT |  : |  Apdorojami plotai turi būti pažymėti visą apdorojimo laikotarpį. Turi būti paminėtas apsinuodijimo antikoaguliantu pavojus (tiesioginis ar netiesioginis) ir nurodytas priešnuodis.  
HU |  : |  A kezelt területet a kezelés ideje alatt külön jelöléssel kell megjelölni. A jelölésben fel kell hívni a figyelmet a véralvadásgátló szertől való mérgeződés veszélyére és annak ellenszerére.  
MT |  : |  Il-post ittrattat għandu jkun immarkat filwaqt li jkun qiegħed jiġi itrattat. Għandu jissemma l-periklu ta’ avvelenament (primarju jew sekondarju) bl-antikoagulant u l-antitodu tiegħu.  
NL |  : |  De behandelde zone moet tijdens de verdelgingsperiode worden gemarkeerd. Het risico van een (primaire of secundaire) vergiftiging door het antistollingsmiddel moet worden vermeld, alsmede het tegengif.  
PL |  : |  Obszar poddany zabiegowi musi być oznakowany podczas zabiegu. Niebezpieczeństwo zatrucia (pierwotnego lub wtórnego) antykoagulantem i antidotum powinno być wyszczególnione.  
PT |  : |  Durante o período de tratamento, marcar a zona, com menção ao perigo de envenenamento (primário ou secundário) pelo anticoagulante e indicação do antídoto deste último.  
RO |  : |  Zona de tratament trebuie marcată în timpul perioadei de aplicare! A se menționa riscul de otrăvire (principal și secundar) cu anticoagulant și antitodul specific!  
SK |  : |  Ošetrovaná plocha sa počas ošetrenia musí označiť. Musí sa uviesť nebezpečenstvo možnej otravy (primárnej alebo sekundárnej) antikoagulantami a protilátky.  
SL |  : |  Tretirano območje je treba v času tretiranja označiti. Navesti je treba nevarnost zastrupitve (neposredne ali posredne) z antikoagulanti in ustrezne antidote.  
FI |  : |  Käsiteltävä alue on merkittävä käsittelyaikana. Antikoagulantin aiheuttama myrkytysvaara (primaarinen tai sekundaarinen) ja vasta-aine mainittava.  
SV |  : |  Det behandlade området skall markeras under behandlingsperioden. Faran för förgiftning (primär eller sekundär) av antikoagulanten samt motgift skall anges.  
  
SPr 3

BG |  : |  Мъртвите гризачи да се отстраняват от третираната площ всеки ден през целия период на третиране. Да не се изхвърлят в кофи за боклук или на сметища.  
---|---|---  
ES |  : |  Durante el tratamiento, los roedores muertos deben retirarse diariamente de la zona tratada. No tirarlos en cubos de basura ni en vertederos.  
CS |  : |  Mrtvé hlodavce během doby použití přípravku denně odstraňujte. Neodkládejte je do nádob na odpadky ani na smetiště.  
DA |  : |  Døde gnavere skal fjernes fra behandlingsområdet hver dag. Anbring ikke de døde gnavere i åbne affaldsbeholdere.  
DE |  : |  Tote Nager während der Einsatzperiode täglich entfernen. Nicht in Müllbehältern oder auf Müllkippen entsorgen.  
ET |  : |  Surnud närilised tuleb eemaldada käitlemisalalt käitlemise ajal iga päev. Mitte panna prügikastidesse või prügi mahapaneku kohtadesse.  
EL |  : |  Τα νεκρά τρωκτικά πρέπει να απομακρύνονται καθημερινά από την περιοχή χρήσης σε όλη τη διάρκεια χρησιμοποίησης του προϊόντος. Να μην τοποθετούνται σε κάδους απορ- ριμμάτων ούτε σε σακούλες σκουπιδιών.  
EN |  : |  Dead rodents must be removed from the treatment area each day during treatment. Do not place in refuse bins or on rubbish tips.  
FR |  : |  Les rongeurs morts doivent être retirés quotidiennement de la zone de traitement pendant toute la période du traitement. Ne pas les jeter dans les poubelles ni les décharges.  
IT |  : |  I roditori morti devono essere rimossi quotidianamente dalla zona del trattamento per tutta la durata dello stesso e non devono essere gettati nei rifiuti o nelle discariche.  
LV |  : |  Apstrādes laikā beigtos grauzējus no apstrādātās platības aizvākt katru dienu. Neizmest tos atkritumu tvertnēs vai kaudzēs.  
LT |  : |  Žuvę graužikai turi būti surenkami iš apdoroto ploto kiekvieną dieną viso naikinimo metu. Nemesti i šiukšlių dėžes arba sąvartynus.  
HU |  : |  Az elhullott rágcsálókat a kezelés alatt naponta el kell távolítani a kezelt területről. A tetemeket tilos hulladéktartályban vagy hulladéklerakóban elhelyezni.  
MT |  : |  Għandhom jitneħħew kuljum ir-rodenti mejta mill-post ittrattat. Tarmihomx f’kontenituri taż-żibel jew fuq ilmiżbliet.  
NL |  : |  Tijdens de verdelgingsperiode moeten de knaagdieren elke dag uit de behandelde zone worden verwijderd. Gooi ze niet in vuilnisbakken of op storten.  
PL |  : |  Martwe gryzonie usuwać z obszaru poddanego zabiegowi każdego dnia. Nie wyrzucać do pojemników na śmieci i nie wywozić na wysypiska śmieci.  
PT |  : |  Durante o período de tratamento, remover diariamente os roedores mortos da zona de tratamento, mas sem os deitar ao lixo ou depositar em lixeiras.  
RO |  : |  Rozătoarele moarte trebuie să fie îndepărtate din zona tratată în fiecare zi în timpul tratamentului! A nu se arunca în recipientele pentru gunoi sau la gropile de gunoi!  
SK |  : |  Mŕtve hlodavce treba z ošetrovanej plochy každý deň odstrániť. Nehádžte ich do odpadových nádob alebo na smetisko.  
SL |  : |  Poginule glodalce je treba odstraniti s tretiranega območja sproti, vsak dan v času tretiranja, vendar ne v zabojnike za odpadke ali odlagališča smeti.  
FI |  : |  Kuolleet jyrsijät on kerättävä käsittelyaikana alueelta päivittäin. Niitä ei saa heittää jätesäiliöihin tai kaatopaikoille.  
SV |  : |  Döda gnagare skall tas bort från behandlingsområdet varje dag under behandlingen. Får inte läggas i soptunnor eller på soptipp.  
  
3\. Attribution criteria for standard phrases for specific safety precautions

3.1. Introduction

In general, plant-protection products are only authorised for those specified uses, which are acceptable on the basis of an assessment according to the uniform principles laid down in the Annex to Regulation (EU) No [Office of Publications please insert number-Commission Regulation (EU) No …/… of […] implementing Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards uniform principles for evaluation and authorisation of plant protection products].

As far as applicable, the specific safety precautions shall reflect the results of such assessments according to the uniform principles and shall be applied in particular in those cases where risk-mitigation measures are necessary to prevent unacceptable effects.

3.2. Attribution criteria for standard phrases for safety precautions for operators

SPo 1

After contact with skin, first remove product with a dry cloth and then wash the skin with plenty of water.

The phrase shall be assigned for plant-protection products containing ingredients which may react violently with water, such as cyanide salts or aluminium phosphide.

SPo 2

Wash all protective clothing after use.

The phrase is recommended when protective clothing is required to protect operators. It is obligatory for all plant protection products classified as T or T+.

SPo 3

After igniting the product, do not inhale smoke and leave the treated area immediately.

The phrase may be assigned to plant-protection products used for fumigation in cases where the use of a respiratory mask is not warranted.

SPo 4

The container must be opened outdoors and in dry conditions.

The phrase shall be assigned to plant-protection products containing active substances which may react violently with water or damp air, such as aluminium phosphide, or which may cause spontaneous combustion, such as (alkylenebis-) dithiocarbamates. This phrase may also be assigned to volatile products classified with R20, 23 or 26. Expert judgement must be applied in individual cases, to assess whether the properties of the preparation and the packaging are such as to cause harm to the operator.

SPo 5

Ventilate treated areas/greenhouses thoroughly/time to be specified/until spray has dried before re-entry.

The phrase may be assigned to plant-protection products used in greenhouses or other confined spaces, such as stores.

3.3. Attribution criteria for standard phrases for safety precautions for the environment

SPe 1

To protect groundwater/soil organisms do not apply this or any other product containing (identify active substance or class of substances, as appropriate) more than (time period or frequency to be specified).

The phrase shall be assigned to plant-protection products for which an evaluation according to the uniform principles shows for one or more of the labelled uses that risk-mitigation measures are necessary to avoid accumulation in soil, effects on earthworms or other soil-dwelling organisms or soil microflora and/or contamination of groundwater.

SPe 2

To protect groundwater/effects on aquatic organisms do not apply to (soil type or situation to be specified) soils.

The phrase may be assigned as a risk-mitigation measure to avoid any potential contamination of groundwater or surface water under vulnerable conditions (e.g. associated to soil type, topography or for drained soils), if an evaluation according to the uniform principles shows for one or more of the labelled uses that risk-mitigation measures are necessary to avoid unacceptable effects.

SPe 3

To protect aquatic organisms/non-target plants/non-target arthropods/insects respect an unsprayed buffer zone of (distance to be specified) to non-agricultural land/surface water bodies.

The phrase shall be assigned to protect non-target plants, non-target arthropods and/or aquatic organisms, if an evaluation according to the uniform principles shows for one or more of the labelled uses that risk-mitigation measures are necessary to avoid unacceptable effects.

SPe 4

To protect aquatic organisms/non-target plants do not apply on impermeable surfaces such as asphalt, concrete, cobblestones, railway tracks and other situations with a high risk of run-off.

Depending on the use pattern of the plant-protection product, Member States may assign the phrase to mitigate the risk of run-off in order to protect aquatic organisms or non-target plants.

SPe 5

To protect birds/wild mammals the product must be entirely incorporated in the soil; ensure that the product is also fully incorporated at the end of rows.

The phrase shall be assigned to plant-protection products, such as granules or pellets, which must be incorporated to protect birds or wild mammals.

SPe 6

To protect birds/wild mammals remove spillages.

The phrase shall be assigned to plant-protection products, such as granules or pellets, to avoid uptake by birds or wild mammals. It is recommended for all solid formulations, which are used undiluted.

SPe 7

Do not apply during bird breeding period.

The phrase shall be assigned when an evaluation according to the uniform principles shows that for one or more of the labelled uses such a mitigation measure is necessary.

SPe 8

Dangerous to bees/To protect bees and pollinating insects do not apply to crop plants when in flower/Do not use where bees are actively foraging/Remove or cover beehives during application and for (state time) after treatment/Do not apply when flowering weeds are present/Remove weeds before flowering/Do not apply before (state time)

The phrase shall be assigned to plant-protection products for which an evaluation according to the uniform principles shows for one or more of the labelled uses that risk-mitigation measures must be applied to protect bees or other pollinating insects. Depending on the use pattern of the plant-protection product, and other relevant national regulatory provisions, Member States may select the appropriate phrasing to mitigate the risk to bees and other pollinating insects and their brood.

3.4. Attribution criteria for standard phrases for safety precautions for good agricultural practice

SPa 1

To avoid the build-up of resistance do not apply this or any other product containing (identify active substance or class of substances, as appropriate) more than (number of applications or time period to be specified).

The phrase shall be assigned when such a restriction appears necessary to limit the risk of development of resistance.

3.5. Attribution criteria for standard phrases for specific safety precautions for rodenticides

SPr 1

The baits must be securely deposited in a way so as to minimise the risk of consumption by other animals. Secure bait blocks so that they cannot be dragged away by rodents.

To ensure compliance of operators the phrase shall appear prominently on the label, so that misuse is excluded as far as possible.

SPr 2

Treatment area must be marked during the treatment period. The danger from being poisoned (primary or secondary) by the anticoagulant and the antidote against it shall be mentioned.

The phrase shall appear prominently on the label, so that accidental poisoning is excluded as far as possible.

SPr 3

Dead rodents must be removed from the treatment area each day during treatment. Do not place in refuse bins or on rubbish tips.

To avoid secondary poisoning of animals the phrase shall be assigned to all rodenticides containing anticoagulants as active substances.

* * *
  *[*]: Asterisk
  *[?]: Question mark
